<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" ?>

<!DOCTYPE TEI.2 SYSTEM "http://www.gutenberg.org/tei/marcello/0.4/dtd/pgtei.dtd" [

<!ENTITY u5  "http://www.tei-c.org/Lite/">

]>

<TEI.2 lang="en">
<teiHeader>
  <fileDesc>
    <titleStmt>
      <title>The Faith of Our Fathers</title>
      <author><name reg="Gibbons, James Cardinal">James Cardinal Gibbons</name></author>
    </titleStmt>
    <editionStmt>
      <edition n="93">Edition 93</edition>
    </editionStmt>
    <publicationStmt>
      <publisher>Project Gutenberg</publisher>
      <date>December 7, 2008</date>
      <idno type="etext-no">27435</idno>
      <availability>
        <p>This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and
        with almost no restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it
        away or re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg
        License online at www.gutenberg.org/license</p>
      </availability>
    </publicationStmt>
    <sourceDesc>
      <bibl>
        Created electronically.
      </bibl>
    </sourceDesc>
  </fileDesc>
  <encodingDesc>
  </encodingDesc>
  <profileDesc>
    <langUsage>
      <language id="en"></language>
    </langUsage>
  </profileDesc>
  <revisionDesc>
    <change>
      <date value="2008-12-07">December 12, 2008</date>
      <respStmt>
        <name>
            Produced by Geoff Horton, David King,
            and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at &lt;http://www.pgdp.net/&gt;.
        </name>
      </respStmt>
      <item>Project Gutenberg TEI edition 1</item>
    </change>
  </revisionDesc>
</teiHeader>

<pgExtensions>
  <pgStyleSheet>
    .boxed           { x-class: boxed }
    .shaded          { x-class: shaded }
    .rules           { x-class: rules; rules: all }
    .indent          { margin-left: 2 }
    .bold            { font-weight: bold }
    .italic          { font-style: italic }
    .smallcaps       { font-variant: small-caps }
    .gesperrt        { font-style: italic }
  </pgStyleSheet>

  <pgCharMap formats="txt.iso-8859-1">
    <char id="U0x2014">
      <charName>mdash</charName>
      <desc>EM DASH</desc>
      <mapping>--</mapping>
    </char>
    <char id="U0x2003">
      <charName>emsp</charName>
      <desc>EM SPACE</desc>
      <mapping>  </mapping>
    </char>
    <char id="U0x2026">
      <charName>hellip</charName>
      <desc>HORIZONTAL ELLIPSIS</desc>
      <mapping>...</mapping>
    </char>
  </pgCharMap>
</pgExtensions>

<text lang="en">
  <front>
    <div>
      <divGen type="pgheader" />
    </div>
    <div>
      <divGen type="encodingDesc" />
    </div>

    <div rend="page-break-before: always">
      <p rend="font-size: xx-large; text-align: center">The Faith of Our Fathers</p>
      <p rend="font-size: large; text-align: center">Being a Plain Exposition and Vindication of the</p>
      <p rend="font-size: large; text-align: center">Church Founded by Our Lord</p>
      <p rend="font-size: large; text-align: center">Jesus Christ</p>
      <p rend="font-size: large; text-align: center">By</p>
      <p rend="font-size: xx-large; text-align: center">James Cardinal Gibbons</p>
      <p rend="font-size: large; text-align: center">Archbishop of Baltimore</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">Ninety-third Carefully Revised and Enlarged Edition</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">John Murphy Company</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">Publishers</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">Baltimore, MD. New York</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">R. &amp; T. Washbourne, Ltd.</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">10 Paternoster Row, London, and at Manchester.</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">Birmingham and Glasgow</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">1917</p>
    </div>
    <div rend="page-break-before: always">
      <head>Contents</head>
      <divGen type="toc" />
    </div>
  </front>
<body>

<pb n="iv"/><anchor id="Pgiv"/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<head>Dedication.</head>

<p rend='text-align: center'>
<hi rend='italic'>Affectionately Dedicated</hi><lb/>
To The<lb/>
Clergy and Laity<lb/>
Of The<lb/>
Archdiocese And Province Of Baltimore.
</p>

</div>

<pb n="v"/><anchor id="Pgv"/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index="toc"/>
<index index="pdf"/>
<head>Preface To The Eleventh Edition.</head>

<p>
The first edition of <q>The Faith of Our Fathers</q>
was issued in December, 1876. From that time to
the present fifty thousand copies of the work have
been disposed of in the United States, Canada,
Great Britain and Ireland, and in the British
Colonies of Oceanica.
</p>

<p>
This gratifying result has surpassed the author's
most sanguine expectations, and is a consoling
evidence that the investigation of religious
truths is not wholly neglected even in this iron
age, so engrossed by material considerations.
</p>

<p>
Besides carefully revising the book, the author
has profited by the kind suggestion of some
friends, and inserted a chapter on the prerogatives
and sanctity of the Blessed Virgin, which, it is
hoped, will be not less acceptable to his readers
than the other portions of the work.
</p>

<p>
He is also happy to announce that German editions
have been published both in this country and
in Germany.
</p>

<p>
He takes this occasion to return his hearty
thanks to the editors of the Catholic periodicals, as
well as of the secular press, for their favorable
notices, which have no doubt contributed much to
the large circulation of the book.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Baltimore</hi>,<lb/>
<hi rend='italic'>Feast of St. Thomas Aquinas</hi>, 1879.
</p>

</div>

<pb n="vi"/><anchor id="Pgvi"/>

<div>
<index index="toc"/>
<index index="pdf"/>
<head>Preface To The Forty-Seventh Edition.</head>

<p>
It is very gratifying to the author to note the
large increase in the sale of <q>The Faith of Our
Fathers.</q> Apart from personal considerations,
it is pleasing to know that the popular interest in
the Catholic Church and whatever pertains to her
doctrines and discipline, is growing more widespread
and earnest.
</p>

<p>
Since 1879, when the eleventh revised edition
was given to the public, there have been thirty-five
editions, and the number of copies sold reaches
nearly a quarter of a million.
</p>

<p>
This desire to understand the teachings of the
Church of our Fathers is not confined to our own
country. It is manifest in other lands, as shown
by the translations that have been made of this
exposition of Catholic belief into French, German,
Spanish, Italian, Norwegian and Swedish.
</p>

<p>
In the hope that they will add to the usefulness
of the book, several passages upon doctrinal subjects
have been inserted.
</p>

<p>
With these few remarks, the forty-seventh edition
of <q>The Faith of Our Fathers</q> is presented
to the sincere and earnest seeker after religious
truth by
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>The Author</hi><lb/>
<hi rend='italic'>Feast of St. Anselm</hi>, 1895.
</p>

</div>

<pb n="vii"/><anchor id="Pgvii"/>

<div>
<index index="toc"/>
<index index="pdf"/>
<head>Preface.</head>

<p>
The object of this little volume is to present in a
plain and practical form an exposition and vindication
of the principal tenets of the Catholic
Church. It was thought sufficient to devote but a
brief space to such Catholic doctrines and practices
as are happily admitted by Protestants, while
those that are controverted by them are more elaborately
elucidated.
</p>

<p>
The work was compiled by the author during the
uncertain hours which he could spare from the
more active duties of the ministry. It substantially
embodies the instructions and discourses delivered
by him before mixed congregations in Virginia
and North Carolina.
</p>

<p>
He has often felt that the salutary influence of
such instructions, especially on the occasion of a
mission in the rural districts, would be much augmented
if they were supplemented by books or
tracts circulated among the people, and which
could be read and pondered at leisure.
</p>

<p>
As his chief aim has been to bring home the
truths of the Catholic faith to our separated
brethren, who generally accept the Scripture as
the only source of authority in religious matters,
he has endeavored to fortify his statements by
abundant reference to the sacred text. He has
thought proper, however, to add frequent quotations
from the early Fathers, whose testimony, at
least as witnesses of the faith of their times, must
<pb n="viii"/><anchor id="Pgviii"/>
be accepted even by those who call in question
their personal authority.
</p>

<p>
Though the writer has sought to be exact in all
his assertions, an occasional inaccuracy may have
inadvertently crept in. Any emendations which
the venerated Prelates or Clergy may deign to
propose will be gratefully attended to in a subsequent
edition.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Richmond</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>November</hi> 21st, 1876.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index="toc"/>
<index index="pdf"/>
<head>Preface To Eighty-Third Revised Edition.</head>

<p>
The new edition of <q>The Faith of Our Fathers</q>
has been carefully revised, and enriched with several
pages of important matter.
</p>

<p>
It is gratifying to note that since the first edition
appeared, in 1876, up to the present time, fourteen
hundred thousand copies have been published, and
the circulation of the book is constantly increasing.
</p>

<p>
The work has also been translated into nearly
all the languages of Europe.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Baltimore</hi>,<lb/>
<hi rend='italic'>May</hi> 1st, 1917.
</p>

</div>

<pb n="xi"/><anchor id="Pgxi"/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index="toc"/>
<index index="pdf"/>
<head>Introduction.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>My Dear Reader</hi>:&mdash;Perhaps this is the first time
in your life that you have handled a book in which
the doctrines of the Catholic Church are expounded
by one of her own sons. You have, no
doubt, heard and read many things regarding our
Church; but has not your information come from
teachers justly liable to suspicion? You asked for
bread, and they gave you a stone. You asked for
fish, and they reached you a serpent. Instead of the
bread of truth, they extended to you the serpent of
falsehood. Hence, without intending to be unjust,
is not your mind biased against us because
you listened to false witnesses? This, at least, is
the case with thousands of my countrymen whom
I have met in the brief course of my missionary
career. The Catholic Church is persistently misrepresented
by the most powerful vehicles of information.
</p>

<p>
She is assailed in romances of the stamp of Maria
Monk, and in pictorial papers. It is true that the
falsehood of those illustrated periodicals has been
fully exposed. But the antidote often comes too
late to counteract the poison. I have seen a picture
representing Columbus trying to demonstrate the
practicability of his design to discover a new Continent
before certain monks who are shaking their
fists and gnashing their teeth at him. It matters
not to the artist that Columbus could probably
never have undertaken his voyage and discovery,
as the explorer himself avows, were it not for the
benevolent zeal of the monks, Antonio de Marchena
and Juan Perez, and other ecclesiastics, as
well as for the munificence of Queen Isabella and
the Spanish Court.
</p>

<pb n="xii"/><anchor id="Pgxii"/>

<p>
The Church is misrepresented in so-called Histories
like Foxe's Book of Martyrs. It is true that
he has been successfully refuted by Lingard and
Gairdner. But, how many have read the fictitious
narratives of Foxe, who have never perused a page
of Lingard or Gairdner? In a large portion of
the press, and in pamphlets, and especially in the
pulpit, which should be consecrated to truth and
charity, she is the victim of the foulest slanders.
Upon her fair and heavenly brow her enemies put
a hideous mask, and in that guise they exhibit her
to the insults and mockery of the public; just as
Jesus, her Spouse, was treated when, clothed with
a scarlet cloak and crowned with thorns, He was
mocked by a thoughtless rabble.
</p>

<p>
They are afraid to tell the truth of her, for
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l><q rend='pre'>Truth has such a face and such a mien,</q></l>
<l><q rend='post'>As to be loved needs only to be seen.</q><note place='foot'>Dryden,
<hi rend='italic'>Hind and Panther</hi>.</note></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
It is not uncommon for a dialogue like the following
to take place between a Protestant Minister
and a convert to the Catholic Church:
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Minister</hi>.&mdash;You cannot deny that the Roman
Catholic Church teaches gross errors&mdash;the worship
of images, for instance.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Convert</hi>.&mdash;I admit no such charge, for I have
been taught no such doctrines.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Minister</hi>.&mdash;But the Priest who instructed you
did not teach you all. He held back some points
which he knew would be objectionable to you.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Convert</hi>.&mdash;He withheld nothing; for I am in
possession of books treating fully of all Catholic
doctrines.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Minister</hi>.&mdash;Deluded soul! Don't you know that
in Europe they are taught differently?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Convert</hi>.&mdash;That cannot be, for the Church
teaches the same creed all over the world, and
<pb n="xiii"/><anchor id="Pgxiii"/>
most of the doctrinal books which I read, were
originally published in Europe.
</p>

<p>
Yet ministers who make these slanderous statements
are surprised if we feel indignant, and accuse
us of being too sensitive. We have been vilified
so long, that they think we have no right to
complain.
</p>

<p>
We cannot exaggerate the offense of those who
thus wilfully malign the Church. There is a commandment
which says: <q>Thou shalt not bear
false witness against thy neighbor.</q>
</p>

<p>
If it is a sin to bear false testimony against one
individual, how can we characterize the crime of
those who calumniate three hundred millions of
human beings, by attributing to them doctrines
and practices which they repudiate and abhor. I
do not wonder that the Church is hated by those
who learn what she is from her enemies. It is
natural for an honest man to loathe an institution
whose history he believes to be marked by bloodshed,
crime and fraud.
</p>

<p>
Had I been educated as they were, and surrounded
by an atmosphere hostile to the Church,
perhaps I should be unfortunate enough to be
breathing vengeance against her today, instead of
consecrating my life to her defence.
</p>

<p>
It is not of their hostility that I complain, but
because the judgment they have formed of her is
based upon the reckless assertions of her enemies,
and not upon those of impartial witnesses.
</p>

<p>
Suppose that I wanted to obtain a correct estimate
of the Southern people, would it be fair in me
to select, as my only sources of information, certain
Northern and Eastern periodicals which,
during our Civil War, were bitterly opposed to
the race and institutions of the South? Those
papers have represented you as men who always
<pb n="xiv"/><anchor id="Pgxiv"/>
appeal to the sword and pistol, instead of the law,
to vindicate your private grievances. They heaped
accusations against you which I will not here repeat.
Instead of taking these publications as the
basis of my information, it was my duty to come
among you; to live with you; to read your life by
studying your public and private character. This
I have done, and I here cheerfully bear witness to
your many excellent traits of mind and heart.
</p>

<p>
Now I ask you to give to the Catholic Church
the same measure of fairness which you reasonably
demand of me when judging of Southern
character. Ask not her enemies what she is, for
they are blinded by passion; ask not her ungrateful,
renegade children, for you never heard a son
speaking well of the mother whom he had abandoned
and despised.
</p>

<p>
Study her history in the pages of truth. Examine
her creed. Read her authorized catechisms
and doctrinal books. You will find them everywhere
on the shelves of booksellers, in the libraries
of her clergy, on the tables of Catholic families.
</p>

<p>
There is no Freemasonry in the Catholic
Church; she has no secrets to keep back. She has
not one set of doctrines for Bishops and Priests,
and another for the laity. She has not one creed
for the initiated and another for outsiders. Everything
in the Catholic Church is open and above
board. She has the same doctrines for all&mdash;for
the Pope and the peasant.
</p>

<p>
Should not I be better qualified to present to you
the Church's creed than the unfriendly witnesses
whom I have mentioned?
</p>

<p>
I have imbibed her doctrine with my mother's
milk. I have made her history and theology the
study of my life. What motive can I have in misleading
you? Not temporal reward, since I seek
<pb n="xv"/><anchor id="Pgxv"/>
not your money, but your soul, for which Jesus
Christ died. I could not hope for an eternal reward
by deceiving you, for I would thereby purchase
for myself eternal condemnation by gaining
proselytes at the expense of truth.
</p>

<p>
This, friendly reader, is my only motive. I feel
in the depth of my heart that, in possessing Catholic
faith, I hold a treasure compared with which all
things earthly are but dross. Instead of wishing
to bury this treasure in my breast, I long to share
it with you, especially as I lose no part of my
spiritual riches by communicating them to others.
</p>

<p>
It is to me a duty and a labor of love to speak
the truth concerning my venerable Mother, so
much maligned in our days. Were a tithe of the
accusations which are brought against her true, I
would not be attached to her ministry, nor even to
her communion, for a single day. I know these
charges to be false. The longer I know her, the
more I admire and venerate her. Every day she
develops before me new spiritual charms.
</p>

<p>
Ah! my dear friend, if you saw her as her children
see her, she would no longer appear to you as
typified by the woman of Babylon. She would be
revealed to you, <q>Bright as the sun, fair as the
moon;</q> with the beauty of Heaven stamped upon
her brow, glorious <q>as an army in battle array.</q>
You would love her, you would cling to her and
embrace her. With her children, you would rise
up in reverence <q>and call her blessed.</q>
</p>

<p>
Consider what you lose and what you gain in
embracing the Catholic religion.
</p>

<p>
Your loss is nothing in comparison with your
gain. You do not surrender your manhood or
your dignity or independence or reasoning powers.
You give up none of those revealed truths which
you may possess already. The only restraint imposed
<pb n="xvi"/><anchor id="Pgxvi"/>
upon you is the restraint of the Gospel, and
to this you will not reasonably object.
</p>

<p>
You gain everything that is worth having. You
acquire a full and connected knowledge of God's
revelation. You get possession of the whole truth
as it is in Jesus. You no longer see it in fragments,
but reflected before you in all its beauty, as
in a polished mirror. While others are outside
criticising the architecture of the temple, you are
inside worshiping the divine Architect and saying
devoutly with the Psalmist: <q>I have loved O Lord,
the beauty of Thy house and the place where Thy
glory dwelleth.</q> While others from without find
in the stained-glass windows only blurred and confused
figures without symmetry or attraction or
meaning, you from within, are gazing with silent
rapture on God's glorified saints, with their outlines
clearly defined on the windows, and all illuminated
with the sunlight of heaven. Your knowledge
of the truth is not only complete and harmonious,
but it becomes fixed and steady. You
exchange opinion for certainty. You are no longer
<q>tossed about by every wind of doctrine,</q> but you
are firmly grounded on the rock of truth. Then
you enjoy that profound peace which springs from
the conscious possession of the truth.
</p>

<p>
In coming to the Church, you are not entering a
strange place, but you are returning to your
Father's home. The house and furniture may
look odd to you, but it is just the same as your
forefathers left it three hundred years ago. In
coming back to the Church, you worship where
your fathers worshiped before you, you kneel before
the altar at which they knelt, you receive the
Sacraments which they received, and respect the
authority of the clergy whom they venerated. You
come back like the Prodigal Son to the home of
<pb n="xvii"/><anchor id="Pgxvii"/>
your father and mother. The garment of joy is
placed upon you, the banquet of love is set before
you, and you receive the kiss of peace as a pledge
of your filiation and adoption. One hearty embrace
of your tender Mother will compensate you
for all the sacrifices you may have made, and you
will exclaim with the penitent Augustine: <q>Too
late have I known thee, O Beauty, ever ancient and
ever new, too late have I loved thee.</q> Should the
perusal of this book bring one soul to the knowledge
of the Church, my labor will be amply rewarded.
</p>

<p>
Remember that nothing is so essential as the salvation
of your immortal soul, <q>for what doth it
profit a man, if he gain the whole world, and lose
his own soul? Or what shall a man give in exchange
for his soul?</q><note place='foot'>Matt. xvi. 26.</note> Let not, therefore, the
fear of offending friends and relatives, the persecution
of men, the loss of earthly possessions, nor
any other temporal calamity, deter you from investigating
and embracing the true religion. <q>For
our present tribulation, which is momentary and
light, worketh for us above measure exceedingly
an eternal weight of glory.</q><note place='foot'>II. Cor. iv. 17.</note>
</p>

<p>
May God give you light to see the truth, and,
having seen it, may He give you courage and
strength to follow it!
</p>

</div>

<pb n="001"/><anchor id="Pg001"/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc' level1='Chapter I. The Blessed Trinity, The Incarnation, Etc.'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='Chapter I.'/>
<head type='sub'>Chapter I.</head>
<head>The Blessed Trinity, The Incarnation, Etc.</head>

<p>
The Catholic Church teaches that there is but
one God, who is infinite in knowledge, in
power, in goodness, and in every other perfection;
who created all things by His omnipotence,
and governs them by His Providence.
</p>

<p>
In this one God there are three distinct Persons,&mdash;the
Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, who
are perfectly equal to each other.
</p>

<p>
We believe that Jesus Christ, the Second Person
of the Blessed Trinity, is perfect God and perfect
Man. He is God, for He <q>is over all things,
God blessed forever.</q><note place='foot'>Rom. ix. 5.</note>
<q>He is God of the substance
of the Father, begotten before time; and
He is Man of the substance of His Mother, born in
time.</q><note place='foot'>Athanasian
Creed.</note> Out of love for us, and in order to rescue
us from the miseries entailed upon us by the disobedience
of our first parents, the Divine Word
descended from heaven, and became Man in the
womb of the Virgin Mary, by the operation of the
Holy Ghost. He was born on Christmas day, in
a stable at Bethlehem.
</p>

<p>
After having led a life of obscurity for about
thirty years, chiefly at Nazareth, He commenced
<pb n="002"/><anchor id="Pg002"/>
His public career. He associated with Him a
number of men who are named Apostles, whom
He instructed in the doctrines of the religion which
He established.
</p>

<p>
For three years He went about doing good,
giving sight to the blind, hearing to the deaf, healing
all kinds of diseases, raising the dead to life,
and preaching throughout Judea the new Gospel
of peace.<note place='foot'>Matt. xi.</note>
</p>

<p>
On Good Friday He was crucified on Mount Calvary,
and thus purchased for us redemption by
His death. Hence Jesus exclusively bears the
titles of <hi rend='italic'>Savior</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>Redeemer</hi>,
because <q>there is
no other name under heaven given to men whereby
we must be saved.</q><note place='foot'>Acts iv. 12.</note>
<q>He was wounded for our
iniquities; He was bruised for our sins, ... and
by His bruises we are healed.</q><note place='foot'>Isaiah liii. 5.</note>
</p>

<p>
We are commanded by Jesus, suffering and dying
for us, to imitate Him by the crucifixion of our
flesh, and by acts of daily mortification. <q>If anyone,</q>
He says, <q>will come after Me, let him deny
himself, and take up his cross daily and follow
Me.</q><note place='foot'>Luke ix. 23.</note>
</p>

<p>
Hence we abstain from the use of flesh meat on
Friday&mdash;the day consecrated to our Savior's sufferings&mdash;not
because the eating of flesh meat is
sinful in itself, but as an act of salutary mortification.
Loving children would be prompted by filial
tenderness to commemorate the anniversary of
their father's death rather by prayer and fasting
than by feasting. Even so we abstain on Fridays
from flesh meat that we may in a small measure
testify our practical sympathy for our dear Lord
by the mortification of our body, endeavoring, like
St. Paul, <q>to bear about in our body the mortification
<pb n="003"/><anchor id="Pg003"/>
of Jesus, that the life also of Jesus may be
made manifest in our bodies.</q><note place='foot'>II. Cor. iv. 10.</note>
</p>

<p>
The Cross is held in the highest reverence by
Catholics, because it was the instrument of our
Savior's crucifixion. It surmounts our churches
and adorns our sanctuaries. We venerate it as
the emblem of our salvation. <q>Far be it from
me,</q> says the Apostle, <q>to glory save in the cross
of our Lord Jesus Christ.</q><note place='foot'>Gal.
vi. 14.</note> We do not, of
course, attach any intrinsic virtue to the Cross;
this would be sinful and idolatrous. Our veneration
is referred to Him who died upon it.
</p>

<p>
It is also a very ancient and pious practice for
the faithful to make on their person the sign of the
Cross, saying at the same time: <q>In the name of
the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy
Ghost.</q> Tertullian, who lived in the second century
of the Christian era, says: <q>In all our actions,
when we come in or go out, when we dress,
when we wash, at our meals, before retiring to
sleep, ... we form on our foreheads the sign of
the cross. These practices are not commanded by
a formal law of Scripture; but tradition teaches
them, custom confirms them, faith observes
them.</q><note place='foot'>De Corona, C.
iii.</note> By the sign of the cross we make a profession
of our faith in the Trinity and the Incarnation,
and perform a most salutary act of religion.
</p>

<p>
We believe that on Easter Sunday Jesus Christ
manifested His divine power by raising Himself to
life, and that having spent forty days on earth,
after His resurrection, instructing His disciples,
He ascended to heaven from the Mount of Olives.
</p>

<p>
On the Feast of Pentecost, or Whitsunday, ten
days after His Ascension, our Savior sent, as He
had promised, His Holy Spirit to His disciples,
while they were assembled together in prayer.
<pb n="004"/><anchor id="Pg004"/>
The Holy Ghost purified their hearts from sin, and
imparted to them a full knowledge of those doctrines
of salvation which they were instructed to
preach. On the same Feast of Pentecost the
Apostles commenced their sublime mission, from
which day, accordingly, we date the active life of
the Catholic Church.
</p>

<p>
Our Redeemer gave the most ample authority
to the Apostles to teach in His name; commanding
them to <q>preach the Gospel to every creature,</q><note place='foot'>Mark
xvi. 15.</note>
and directing all, under the most severe penalties,
to hear and obey them: <q>He that heareth you,
heareth Me; and he that despiseth you, despiseth
Me. And He that despiseth Me, despiseth Him
that sent Me.</q><note place='foot'>Luke x. 16.</note>
</p>

<p>
And lest we should be mistaken in distinguishing
between the true Church and false sects, which
our Lord predicted would arise, He was pleased
to stamp upon His Church certain shining marks,
by which every sincere inquirer could easily
recognize her as His only Spouse. The principal
marks or characteristics of the true Church are,
her Unity, Sanctity, Catholicity, and Apostolicity,<note place='foot'>Symb.
Constantinop.</note>
to which may be added the Infallibility of her
teaching and the Perpetuity of her existence.
</p>

<p>
I shall treat successively of these marks.
</p>

</div>

<pb n="005"/><anchor id="Pg005"/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc' level1='Chapter II. The Unity Of The Church.'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='Chapter II.'/>
<head type='sub'>Chapter II.</head>
<head>The Unity Of The Church.</head>

<p>
By unity is meant that the members of the true
Church must be united in the belief of the
same doctrines of revelation, and in the acknowledgment
of the authority of the same pastors.
Heresy and schism are opposed to Christian
unity. By heresy, a man rejects one or more articles
of the Christian faith. By schism, he spurns
the authority of his spiritual superiors. That our
Savior requires this unity of faith and government
in His members is evident from various
passages of Holy Writ. In His admirable prayer
immediately before His passion He says: <q>I pray
for them also who through their word shall believe
in Me; that they all may be one, as Thou,
Father, in Me and I in Thee, that they also may be
one in Us; that the world may believe that Thou
hast sent Me,</q><note place='foot'>John xvii.
20, 21.</note> because the unity of the Church
is the most luminous evidence of the Divine mission
of Christ. Jesus prayed that His followers
may be united in the bond of a common faith, as
He and His Father are united in essence, and certainly
the prayer of Jesus is always heard.
</p>

<p>
St. Paul ranks schism and heresy with the
crimes of murder and idolatry, and he declares
that the authors of sects shall not possess the Kingdom
<pb n="006"/><anchor id="Pg006"/>
of God.<note place='foot'>Gal. v. 20,
21.</note> He also addresses a letter to the
Ephesians from his prison in Rome, and if the
words of the Apostle should always command our
homage, with how much reverence are they to be
received when he writes in chains from the Imperial
City! In this Epistle he insists upon unity of
faith in the following emphatic language: <q>Be
careful to keep the unity of the Spirit in the
bond of peace; one body and one Spirit, as you
are called in one hope of your calling; one Lord,
one faith, one baptism, one God and Father
of all, who is above all, and through all, and
in us all.</q><note place='foot'>Ephes. iv.
3-6.</note> As you all, he says, worship one
God, and not many gods; as you acknowledge the
same Divine Mediator of redemption, and not
many mediators; as you are sanctified by the same
Divine Spirit, and not by many spirits; as you all
hope for the same heaven, and not different
heavens, so must you all profess the same faith.
</p>

<p>
Unity of government is not less essential to the
Church of Christ than unity of doctrine. Our
Divine Saviour never speaks of His Churches, but
of His <emph>Church</emph>. He does not say: <q>Upon this rock
I will build my Churches,</q> but <q>upon this rock I
will build My Church,</q><note place='foot'>Matt. xvi.
18.</note> from which words we
must conclude that it never was His intention to
establish or to sanction various conflicting denominations,
but one corporate body, with all the members
united under one visible Head; for as the
Church is a visible body, it must have a visible
head.
</p>

<p>
The Church is called a kingdom: <q>He shall
reign over the house of Jacob forever, and of His
kingdom there shall be no end.</q><note place='foot'>Luke
i. 32, 33.</note> Now in every
well-regulated kingdom there is but <hi rend='italic'>one king, one
form of government, one uniform body of laws</hi>,
<pb n="007"/><anchor id="Pg007"/>
which all are obliged to observe. In like manner,
in Christ's spiritual kingdom, there must be one
Chief to whom all owe spiritual allegiance; one
form of ecclesiastical government; one uniform
body of laws which all Christians are bound to observe;
for, <q>every kingdom divided against itself
shall be made desolate.</q><note place='foot'>Matt. xii. 25.</note>
</p>

<p>
Our Savior calls His Church a sheepfold. <q>And
there shall be made one fold and one shepherd.</q><note place='foot'>John x. 16.</note>
What more beautiful or fitting illustration
of unity can we have than that which is suggested
by a sheepfold? All the sheep of a flock
cling together. If they are momentarily separated,
they are impatient till reunited. They follow in
the same path. They feed on the same pastures.
They obey the same shepherd, and fly from the
voice of strangers. So did our Lord intend that
all the sheep of His fold should be nourished by
the same sacraments and the same bread of life;
that they should follow the same rule of faith as
their guide to heaven; that they should listen to
the voice of one Chief Pastor, and that they should
carefully shun false teachers.
</p>

<p>
His Church is compared to a human body. <q>As
in one body we have many members, but all the
members have not the same office; so we, being
many, are one body in Christ, and every one members
one of the other.</q><note place='foot'>Rom. xii. 4,
5.</note> In one body there are
many members, all inseparably connected with the
head. The head commands and the foot instantly
moves, the hand is raised and the lips open. Even
so our Lord ordained that His Church, composed
of many members, should be all united to one
supreme visible Head, whom they are bound to
obey.
</p>

<pb n="008"/><anchor id="Pg008"/>

<p>
The Church is compared to a vine. <q>I am the
Vine, ye the branches; he that abideth in Me and I
in him, the same beareth much fruit, for without
Me ye can do nothing.</q><note place='foot'>John xv.
5.</note> All the branches of a
vine, though spreading far and wide, are necessarily
connected with the main stem, and from its
sap they are nourished. In like manner, our
Saviour will have all the saplings of His Vineyard
connected with the main stem, and all draw their
nourishment from the parent stock.
</p>

<p>
The Church, in fine, is called in Scripture by the
beautiful title of bride or spouse of Christ,<note place='foot'>Apoc.
xxi. 9.</note> and
the Christian law admits only of one wife.
</p>

<p>
In fact, our common sense alone, apart from
revelation, is sufficient to convince us that God
could not be the author of various opposing systems
of religion. God is essentially one. He is
Truth itself. How could the God of truth affirm,
for instance, to one body of Christians that there
are three persons in God, and to another there is
only one person in God? How could He say to
one individual that Jesus Christ is God, and to
another that He is only man? How can He tell me
that the punishments of the wicked are eternal,
and tell another that they are not eternal? One of
these contradictory statements must be false.
<q>God is not the God of dissension, but of peace.</q><note place='foot'>I.
Cor. xiv. 33.</note>
</p>

<p>
I see perfect harmony in the laws which govern
the physical world that we inhabit. I see a marvelous
unity in our planetary system. Each
planet moves in its own sphere, and all are controlled
by the central Sun.
</p>

<p>
Why should there not be also harmony and concord
in that spiritual world, the Church of God,
the grandest conception of His omnipotence, and
the most bounteous manifestation of His goodness
and love for mankind!
</p>

<pb n="009"/><anchor id="Pg009"/>

<p>
Hence, it is clear that Jesus Christ intended that
His Church should have one common doctrine
which all Christians are bound to believe, and one
uniform government to which all should be loyally
attached.
</p>

<p>
With all due respect for my dissenting brethren,
truth compels me to say that this unity of doctrine
and government is not to be found in the Protestant
sects, taken collectively or separately. That
the various Protestant denominations differ from
one another not only in minor details, but in most
essential principles of faith, is evident to every one
conversant with the doctrines of the different
Creeds. The multiplicity of sects in this country,
with their mutual recriminations, is the scandal of
Christianity, and the greatest obstacle to the conversion
of the heathen. Not only does sect differ
from sect, but each particular denomination is
divided into two or more independent or conflicting
branches.
</p>

<p>
In the State of North Carolina we have several
Baptist denominations, each having its own distinctive
appellation. There is also the Methodist
Church North and the Methodist Church South.
There was the Old and the New School Presbyterian
Church. And even in the Episcopal Communion,
which is the most conservative body outside
the Catholic Church, there is the ritualistic,
or high church, and the low church. Nay, if you
question closely the individual members composing
any one fraction of these denominations, you
will not rarely find them giving a contradictory
view of their tenets of religion.
</p>

<p>
Protestants differ from one another not only in
doctrine, but in the form of ecclesiastical government
and discipline. The church of England acknowledges
the reigning Sovereign as its Spiritual
<pb n="010"/><anchor id="Pg010"/>
Head. Some denominations recognize Deacons,
Priests, and Bishops as an essential part of their
hierarchy; while the great majority of Protestants
reject such titles altogether.
</p>

<p>
Where, then, shall we find this essential unity of
faith and government? I answer, confidently, nowhere
save in the Catholic Church.
</p>

<p>
The number of Catholics in the world is computed
at three hundred millions. They have
all <q>one Lord, one faith, one baptism,</q> one
creed. They receive the same sacraments, they
worship at the same altar, and pay spiritual allegiance
to one common Head. Should a Catholic
be so unfortunate as contumaciously to deny a
single article of faith, or withdraw from the communion
of his legitimate pastors, he ceases to be a
member of the Church, and is cut off like a
withered branch. The Church had rather sever
her right hand than allow any member to corrode
her vitals. It was thus she excommunicated Henry
VIII. because he persisted in violating the sacred
law of marriage, although she foresaw that the
lustful monarch would involve a nation in his
spiritual ruin. She anathematized, more recently,
Dr. Döllinger, though the prestige of his name
threatened to engender a schism in Germany. She
says to her children: <q>You may espouse any
political party you choose; with this I have no concern.</q>
But as soon as they trench on matters of
faith she cries out: <q>Hitherto thou shalt come,
and shalt go no farther; and here thou shalt break
thy swelling waves</q><note place='foot'>Job xxxviii.
11.</note> of discord. The temple of
faith is the asylum of peace, concord and unity.
</p>

<p>
How sublime and consoling is the thought that
whithersoever a Catholic goes over the broad
world, whether he enters his Church in Pekin or in
<pb n="011"/><anchor id="Pg011"/>
Melbourne, in London, or Dublin, or Paris, or
Rome, or New York, or San Francisco, he is sure
to hear the self-same doctrine preached, to assist
at the same sacrifice, and to partake of the same
sacraments.
</p>

<p>
This is not all. Her Creed is now identical with
what it was in past ages. The same Gospel of
peace that Jesus Christ preached on the Mount;
the same doctrine that St. Peter preached at Antioch
and Rome; St. Paul at Ephesus; St. John
Chrysostom at Constantinople; St. Augustine in
Hippo; St. Ambrose in Milan; St. Remigius in
France; St. Boniface in Germany; St. Athanasius
in Alexandria; the same doctrine that St. Patrick
introduced into Ireland; that St. Augustine
brought into England, and St. Pelagius into Scotland,
and that Columbus brought to this American
Continent, and this is the doctrine that is ever
preached in the Catholic Church throughout the
globe, from January till December&mdash;<q>Jesus Christ
yesterday, and today, and the same forever.</q><note place='foot'>Heb. xiii. 8.</note>
</p>

<p>
The same admirable unity that exists in matters
of faith is also established in the government of
the Church. All the members of the vast body of
Catholic Christians are as intimately united to one
visible Chief as the members of the human body
are joined to the head. The faithful of each Parish
are subject to their immediate Pastor. Each Pastor
is subordinate to his Bishop, and each Bishop
of Christendom acknowledges the jurisdiction of
the Bishop of Rome, the successor of St. Peter,
and Head of the Catholic Church.
</p>

<p>
But it may be asked, is not this unity of faith
impaired by those doctrinal definitions which the
Church has promulgated from time to time? We
answer: No new dogma, unknown to the Apostles,
<pb n="012"/><anchor id="Pg012"/>
not contained in the primitive Christian revelation,
can be admitted. (John xiv. 26; xv. 15; xvi. 13.)
For the Apostles received the whole deposit of
God's word, according to the promise of our Lord:
<q>When He shall come, the Spirit of truth, He
shall teach you all truth.</q> And so the Church
proposes the doctrines of faith, such as came
from the lips of Christ, and as the Holy Spirit
taught them to the Apostles at the birth of the
Christian law&mdash;doctrines which know neither
variation nor decay.
</p>

<p>
Hence, whenever it has been defined that any
point of doctrine pertained to the Catholic faith, it
was always understood that this was equivalent to
the declaration that the doctrine in question had
been revealed to the Apostles, and had come down
to us from them, either by Scripture or tradition.
And as the acts of all the Councils, and the history
of every definition of faith evidently show, it was
never contended that a <emph>new revelation</emph> had been
made, but every inquiry was directed to this one
point&mdash;whether the doctrine in question was contained
in the Sacred Scriptures or in the Apostolic
traditions.
</p>

<p>
A revealed truth frequently has a very extensive
scope, and is directed against error under its many
changing forms. Nor is it necessary that those
who receive this revelation in the first instance
should be explicitly acquainted with its full import,
or cognizant of all its bearings. Truth never
changes; it is the same now, yesterday, and forever,
<emph>in itself</emph>; but our relations towards truth may
change, for that which is hidden from us today
may become known to us tomorrow. <q>It often
happens,</q> says St. Augustine, <q>that when it becomes
necessary to defend certain points of Catholic
doctrine against the insidious attacks of
<pb n="013"/><anchor id="Pg013"/>
heretics they are more carefully studied, they become
<emph>more clearly understood</emph>, they are <emph>more
earnestly inculcated</emph>; and so the very questions
raised by heretics give occasion to a more thorough
knowledge of the subject in question.</q><note place='foot'>De
Civitate Dei, Lib. 16, Cap. ii., No. 1.</note>
</p>

<p>
Let us illustrate this. In the Apostolic revelation
and preaching some truths might have been
contained <emph>implicitly</emph>, <hi rend='italic'>e.g.</hi>, in the doctrine that
grace is necessary for every salutary work, it is
implicitly asserted that the assistance of grace is
required for the inception of every good and salutary
work. This was denied by the semi-Pelagians,
and their error was condemned by an explicit
definition. And so in other matters, as the rising
controversies or new errors gave occasion for it,
there were more <emph>explicit</emph> declarations of what was
formerly <emph>implicitly</emph> believed. In the doctrine of
the supreme power of Peter, as the visible foundation
of the Church, we have the <emph>implied</emph> assertion
of many rights and duties which belong to the
centre of unity. In the revelation of the super-eminent
dignity and purity of the Blessed Virgin
there is implied her exemption from original sin,
etc., etc.
</p>

<p>
So, too, in the beginning many truths might have
been proposed somewhat <emph>obscurely</emph> or <emph>less clearly</emph>;
they might have been <emph>less urgently insisted upon</emph>,
because there was no heresy, no contrary teaching
to render a more explicit declaration necessary.
Now, a doctrine which is <emph>implicitly, less clearly,
not so earnestly</emph> proposed, may be overlooked, misunderstood,
called in question; consequently, it
may happen that some articles are now universally
believed in the Church, in regard to which doubts
and controversies existed in former ages, even
within the bosom of the Church. <q>Those who err
<pb n="014"/><anchor id="Pg014"/>
in belief do but serve to bring out more clearly the
soundness of those who believe rightly. For there
are many things which <emph>lay hidden in the Scriptures</emph>,
and when heretics were cut off they vexed
the Church of God with disputes; then the hidden
things were <emph>brought to light</emph>, and the will of God
was made known.</q> (St. Augustine on the 54th
Psalm, No. 22.)
</p>

<p>
This kind of <emph>progress in faith</emph> we can and do
admit; but the truth is not changed thereby. As
Albertus Magnus says: <q>It would be more correct
to style this the progress of the believer in the
faith than of the faith in the believer.</q>
</p>

<p>
To show that this kind of progress is to be admitted
only two things are to be proved: 1: That
some divinely revealed truths should be contained
in the Apostolic teaching <emph>implicitly, less clearly
explained, less urgently pressed</emph>. And this can be
denied only by those who hold that the Bible is the
only rule of Faith, that it is clear in every part,
and could be readily understood by all from the
beginning. This point I shall consider farther on
in this work. 2. That the Church can, in process
of time, as occasions arise, <emph>declare, explain, urge</emph>.
This is proved not only from the Scriptures and
the Fathers, but even from the conduct of Protestants
themselves, who often boast of the care
and assiduity with which they <q>search the Scriptures,</q>
and study out their meaning, even now
that so many Commentaries on the sacred Text
have been published. And why? To obtain more
light; to understand better what is revealed. It
would appear from this that the only question
which could arise on this point is, not about the
possibility of arriving by degrees at a clearer understanding
of the true sense of revelation, as circumstances
may call for successive developments,
<pb n="015"/><anchor id="Pg015"/>
but about the authority of the Church to propose
and to determine that sense. So that, after all,
we are always brought back to the only real point
of division and dispute between those who are not
Catholics and ourselves, namely, to the authority
of the Church, of which I shall have more to say
hereafter. I cannot conclude better than by quoting
the words of St. Vincent of Lerins: <q>Let us
take care that it be with us in matters of religion,
which affect our souls, as it is with material bodies,
which, as time goes on, pass through successive
phases of growth and development and multiply
their years, but yet remain always the same individual
bodies as they were in the beginning....
It very properly follows from the nature of things
that, with a perfect agreement and consistency between
the beginnings and the final results, when
we reap the harvest of dogmatic truth which has
sprung from the seeds of doctrine sown in the
spring-time of the Church's existence, we should
find no substantial difference between the grain
which was first planted and that which we now
gather. For though the germs of the early faith
have in some respects been evolved in the course
of time, and still receive nourishment and culture,
yet nothing in them that is substantial can ever
suffer change. The Church of Christ is a faithful
and ever watchful guardian of the dogmas which
have been committed to her charge. In this sacred
deposit she changes nothing, she takes nothing
from it, she adds nothing to it.</q>
</p>

</div>

<pb n="016"/><anchor id="Pg016"/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc' level1='Chapter III. The Holiness Of The Church.'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='Chapter III.'/>
<head type='sub'>Chapter III.</head>
<head>The Holiness Of The Church.</head>

<p>
Holiness is also a mark of the true Church;
for in the Creed we say, <q>I believe in the
<emph>holy</emph> Catholic Church.</q>
</p>

<p>
Every society is founded for a special object.
One society is formed with the view of cultivating
social intercourse among its members; a second is
organized to advance their temporal interests; and
a third for the purpose of promoting literary pursuits.
The Catholic Church is a society founded
by our Lord Jesus Christ for the sanctification of
its members; hence, St. Peter calls the Christians
of his time <q>a chosen generation, a royal priesthood,
<emph>a holy nation</emph>, a purchased people.</q><note place='foot'>I.
Pet. ii. 9.</note>
</p>

<p>
The example of our Divine Founder, Jesus
Christ, the sublime moral lessons He has taught
us, the Sacraments He has instituted&mdash;all tend to
our sanctification. They all concentre themselves
in our soul, like so many heavenly rays, to enlighten
and inflame it with the fire of devotion.
</p>

<p>
When the Church speaks to us of the attributes
of our Lord, of His justice and mercy and sanctity
and truth, her object is not merely to extol the
Divine perfections, but also to exhort us to imitate
them, and to be like Him, just and merciful, holy
and truthful. Behold the sublime Model that is
placed before us! It is not man, nor angel, nor
<pb n="017"/><anchor id="Pg017"/>
archangel, but Jesus Christ, the Son of God, <q>who
is the brightness of His glory, and the figure of
His substance.</q><note place='foot'>Heb. i.
3.</note> The Church places His image
over our altars, admonishing us to <q>look and do
according to the pattern shown on the Mount.</q><note place='foot'>Exod.
xxv. 40.</note> And from that height He seems to say to us: <q>Be
ye holy, for I the Lord your God am holy.</q><note place='foot'>Lev.
xix. 2.</note> <q>Be ye perfect, even as your heavenly Father is
perfect.</q><note place='foot'>Matt. v. 48.</note>
<q>Be ye followers of God as most dear
children.</q><note place='foot'>Eph. v. 1.</note>
</p>

<p>
We are invited to lead holy lives, not only because
our Divine Founder, Jesus Christ, was holy,
but also because we bear His sweet and venerable
name. We are called <hi rend='italic'>Christians</hi>. That is a name
we would not exchange for all the high-sounding
titles of Prince or Emperor. We are justly proud
of this appellation of <hi rend='italic'>Christian</hi>; but we are reminded
that it has annexed to it a corresponding
obligation. It is not an idle name, but one full of
solemn significance; for a Christian, as the very
name implies, is a follower or disciple of Christ&mdash;one
who walks in the footsteps of his Master by
observing His precepts; who reproduces in his
own life the character and virtues of his Divine
Model. In a word, a Christian is another Christ.
It would, therefore, be a contradiction in terms, if
a Christian had nothing in common with his Lord
except the name. The disciple should imitate his
Master, the soldier should imitate his Commander,
and the members should be like the Head.
</p>

<p>
The Church constantly allures her children to
holiness by placing before their minds the Incarnation,
life and death of our Savior. What appeals
more forcibly to a life of piety than the contemplation
of Jesus born in a stable, living an humble life
<pb n="018"/><anchor id="Pg018"/>
in Nazareth, dying on a cross, that His blood might
purify us? If He sent forth Apostles to preach
the Gospel to the whole world; if in His name
temples are built in every nation, and missionaries
are sent to the extremities of the globe, all
this is done that we may be Saints. <q>God,</q> says
St. Paul, <q>gave some Apostles, and some Prophets,
and others Evangelists, and others Pastors and
Doctors, for the perfecting of the Saints, for the
work of the ministry, for the building up of the
body of Christ, until we all meet unto the unity of
faith and of the knowledge of the Son of God unto
a perfect man.</q><note place='foot'>Ephes. iv. 11, 13.</note>
</p>

<p>
The moral law which the Catholic Church inculcates
on her children is the highest and holiest
standard of perfection ever presented to any people,
and furnishes the strongest incentives to
virtue.
</p>

<p>
The same Divine precepts delivered through
Moses to the Jews, on Mount Sinai, the same
salutary warnings which the Prophets uttered
throughout Judea, the same sublime and consoling
lessons of morality which Jesus gave on the
Mount&mdash;these are the lessons which the Church
teaches from January till December. The Catholic
preacher does not amuse his audience with
speculative topics or political harangues, or any
other subjects of a transitory nature. He preaches
only <q>Christ, and Him crucified.</q>
</p>

<p>
This code of Divine precepts is enforced with as
much zeal by the Church as was the Decalogue
of old by Moses, when he said: <q>These words,
which I command thee this day, shall be in thy
heart; and thou shalt tell them to thy children;
and thou shalt meditate upon them, sitting in thy
<pb n="019"/><anchor id="Pg019"/>
house, and walking on thy journey, sleeping and
rising.</q><note place='foot'>Deut. vi. 6, 7.</note>
</p>

<p>
The first lesson taught to children in our Sunday-schools
is their duty to know, love and serve
God, and thus to be Saints; for if they know, love
and serve God aright they shall be Saints indeed.
Their tender minds are instructed in this great
truth that though they had the riches of Dives, and
the glory and pleasures of Solomon, and yet fail to
be righteous, they have missed their vocation, and
are <q>wretched, and miserable, and poor, and blind,
and naked.</q><note place='foot'>Apoc. iii.
7.</note> <q>For, what doth it profit a man, if
he gain the whole world and lose his own soul?</q><note place='foot'>Matt.
xvi. 26.</note>
On the contrary though they are as poor as Lazarus,
and as miserable as Job in the days of his adversity,
they are assured that their condition is a
happy one in the sight of God, if they live up to
the maxims of the Gospel.
</p>

<p>
The Church quickens the zeal of her children for
holiness of life by impressing on their minds the
rigor of God's judgments, who <q>will bring to light
the hidden things of darkness, and make manifest
the counsels of the hearts,</q> by reminding them of
the terrors of Hell and of the sweet joys of
Heaven.
</p>

<p>
Not only are Catholics instructed in church on
Sundays but they are exhorted to peruse the Word
of God, and manuals of devotion, at home. The
saints whose lives are there recorded serve like
bright stars to guide them over the stormy ocean
of life to the shores of eternity; while the history
of those who have fallen from grace stands like a
beacon light, warning them to shun the rocks
against which a Solomon and a Judas made shipwreck
of their souls.
</p>

<p>
Our books of piety are adapted to every want
<pb n="020"/><anchor id="Pg020"/>
of the human soul, and are a fruitful source of
sanctification. Who can read without spiritual
profit such works as the almost inspired <hi rend='italic'>Following
of Christ</hi> by Thomas à Kempis; the <hi rend='italic'>Christian Perfection</hi>
of Rodriguez; the <hi rend='italic'>Spiritual Combat</hi> of
Scupoli; the writings of St. Francis de Sales, and
a countless host of other ascetical authors?
</p>

<p>
You will search in vain outside the Catholic
Church for writers comparable in unction and
healthy piety to such as I have mentioned. Compare,
for instance, <hi rend='italic'>Kempis</hi> with <hi rend='italic'>Bunyan's Pilgrim's
Progress</hi>, or <hi rend='italic'>Butler's Lives of the Saints</hi>
with <hi rend='italic'>Foxe's Book of Martyrs</hi>. You lay down
<hi rend='italic'>Butler</hi> with a sweet and tranquil devotion, and with a
profound admiration for the Christian heroes
whose lives he records; while you put aside <hi rend='italic'>Foxe</hi>
with a troubled mind and a sense of vindictive bitterness.
I do not speak of the <hi rend='italic'>Book of Common
Prayer</hi>, because the best part of it is a translation
from our Missal. Protestants also publish <hi rend='italic'>Kempis</hi>,
though sometimes in a mutilated form; every
passage in the original being carefully omitted
which alludes to Catholic doctrines and practices.
</p>

<p>
A distinguished Episcopal clergyman of Baltimore
once avowed to me that his favorite books of
devotion were our standard works of piety. In
saying this, he paid a merited and graceful tribute
to the superiority of Catholic spiritual literature.
</p>

<p>
The Church gives us not only the most pressing
motives, but also the most potent means for our
sanctification. These means are furnished by
prayer and the Sacraments. She exhorts us to
frequent communion with God by prayer and
meditation, and so imperative is this obligation in
our eyes that we would justly hold ourselves
guilty of grave dereliction of duty if we neglected
<pb n="021"/><anchor id="Pg021"/>
for a considerable time the practice of morning
and evening prayer.
</p>

<p>
The most abundant source of graces is also
found in the seven Sacraments of the Church. Our
soul is bathed in the Precious Blood of Jesus
Christ at the font of Baptism, from which we come
forth <q>new creatures.</q> We are then and there
incorporated with Christ, becoming <q>bone of His
bone and flesh of His flesh;</q> <q>for as many of
you,</q> says the Apostle, <q>as have been baptized in
Christ have put on Christ.</q><note place='foot'>Gal.
iii. 27.</note> And as the Holy
Ghost is inseparable from Christ, our bodies are
made the temples of the Spirit of God and our
souls His Sanctuary. <q>Christ loved the Church
and delivered Himself up for it, that He might
sanctify it, cleansing it by the laver of water, in
the word of life; that He might present it to Himself
a glorious Church, not having spot or wrinkle,
or any such thing, but that it should be holy and
without blemish.</q><note place='foot'>Eph. v. 25-27.</note>
</p>

<p>
In Confirmation we receive new graces and new
strength to battle against the temptations of life.
</p>

<p>
In the Eucharist we are fed with the living
Bread which cometh down from Heaven.
</p>

<p>
In Penance are washed away the stains we have
contracted after Baptism.
</p>

<p>
Are we called to the Sacred Ministry, or to the
married state, we find in the Sacraments of Orders
and Matrimony ample graces corresponding with
the condition of life which we have embraced.
</p>

<p>
And our last illness is consoled by Extreme Unction,
wherein we receive the Divine succor necessary
to fortify and purify us before departing
from this world.
</p>

<p>
In a word, the Church, like a watchful mother,
<pb n="022"/><anchor id="Pg022"/>
accompanies us from the cradle to the grave, supplying
us at each step with the medicine of life and
immortality.
</p>

<p>
As the Church offers to her children the strongest
motives and the most powerful means for attaining
to sanctity of life, so does she reap among
them the most abundant fruits of holiness. In
every age and country she is the fruitful mother of
saints. Our Ecclesiastical calendar is not confined
to the names of the twelve Apostles. It is emblazoned
with the lists of heroic Martyrs who
<q>were stoned, and cut asunder, and put to death
by the sword;</q><note place='foot'>Heb. xi.
37.</note> of innumerable Confessors and
Hermits who left all things and followed Christ; of
spotless virgins who preserved their chastity for
the Kingdom of Heaven's sake. Every day in the
year is consecrated in our Martyrology to a large
number of Saints.
</p>

<p>
And in our own times, in every quarter of the
globe and in every department of life, the Church
continues to raise up Saints worthy of the primitive
days of Christianity.
</p>

<p>
If we seek for <emph>Apostles</emph>, we find them conspicuously
among the Bishops of Germany, who are
now displaying in prison and in exile a serene
heroism worthy of Peter and Paul.
</p>

<p>
Every year records the tortures of Catholic
missioners who die <emph>Martyrs</emph> to the Faith in China,
Corea, and other Pagan countries.
</p>

<p>
Among her <emph>confessors</emph> are numbered those devoted
priests who, abandoning home and family
ties, annually go forth to preach the Gospel in
foreign lands. Their worldly possessions are
often confined to a few books of devotion and their
modest apparel.
</p>

<p>
And who is a stranger to her consecrated
<pb n="023"/><anchor id="Pg023"/>
<emph>virgins</emph>, those sisters of various Orders who in
every large city of Christendom are daily reclaiming
degraded women from a life of shame, and
bringing them back to the sweet influences of religion;
who snatch the abandoned offspring of sin
from temporal and spiritual death, and make them
pious and useful members of society, becoming
more than mothers to them; who rescue children
from ignorance, and instill into their minds the
knowledge and love of God.
</p>

<p>
We can point to numberless saints also among
the laity. I dare assert that in almost every congregation
in the Catholic world, men and women
are to be found who exhibit a fervent piety and a
zeal for religion which render them worthy of being
named after the <hi rend='italic'>Annas</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>the Aquilas</hi> and the
<hi rend='italic'>Priscillas</hi> of the New Testament. They attract
not indeed the admiration of the public, because
true piety is unostentatious and seeks a <q>life hidden
with Christ in God.</q><note place='foot'>Coloss. iii. 3.</note>
</p>

<p>
It must not be imagined that, in proclaiming the
sanctity of the Church, I am attempting to prove
that all Catholics are holy. I am sorry to confess
that corruption of morals is too often found among
professing Catholics. We cannot close our eyes to
the painful fact that too many of them, far from
living up to the teachings of their Church, are
sources of melancholy scandal. <q>It must be that
scandals come, but woe to him by whom the scandal
cometh.</q> I also admit that the sin of Catholics
is more heinous in the sight of God than that of
their separated brethren, because they abuse more
grace.
</p>

<p>
But it should be borne in mind that neither God
nor His Church forces any man's conscience. To
all He says by the mouth of His Prophet: <q>Behold
<pb n="024"/><anchor id="Pg024"/>
I set before you the way of life and the way
of death.</q> (Jer. xxi. 8.) The choice rests with
yourselves.
</p>

<p>
It is easy to explain why so many disedifying
members are always found clinging to the robes of
the Church, their spiritual Mother, and why she
never shakes them off nor disowns them as her
children. The Church is animated by the spirit of
her Founder, Jesus Christ. He <q>came into this
world to save sinners.</q><note place='foot'>I.
Tim. i. 15.</note> He <q>came not to call
the just but sinners to repentance.</q> He was the
Friend of Publicans and Sinners that He might
make them the friends of God. And they clung to
Him, knowing His compassion for them.
</p>

<p>
The Church, walking in the footsteps of her
Divine Spouse, never repudiates sinners nor cuts
them off from her fold, no matter how grievous or
notorious may be their moral delinquencies; not
because she connives at their sin, but because she
wishes to reclaim them. She bids them never to
despair, and tries, at least, to weaken their passions,
if she cannot altogether reform their lives.
</p>

<p>
Mindful also of the words of our Lord: <q>The
poor have the Gospel preached to them,</q><note place='foot'>Matt.
xi. 5.</note> the Church has a tender compassion for the victims of
poverty, which has its train of peculiar temptations
and infirmities. Hence, the poor and the
sinners cling to the Church, as they clung to our
Lord during His mortal life.
</p>

<p>
We know, on the other hand, that sinners who
are guilty of gross crimes which shock public
decency are virtually excommunicated from Protestant
Communions. And as for the poor, the
public press often complains that little or no provision
is made for them in Protestant Churches.
A gentleman informed me that he never saw a
<pb n="025"/><anchor id="Pg025"/>
poor person enter an Episcopal Church which was
contiguous to his residence.
</p>

<p>
These excluded sinners and victims of penury
either abandon Christianity altogether, or find
refuge in the bosom of their true Mother, the
Catholic Church, who, like her Divine Spouse,
claims the afflicted as her most cherished inheritance.
The parables descriptive of this Church
which our Lord employed also clearly teach us
that the good and bad shall be joined together in
the Church as long as her earthly mission lasts.
The kingdom of God is like a field in which the
cockle is allowed to grow up with the good seed
until the harvest-time;<note place='foot'>Matt.
xiii. 24-37.</note> it is like a net which encloses
good fish and bad until the hour of separation
comes.<note place='foot'>Ibid. xiii.
47.</note> So, too, the Church is that great
house<note place='foot'>II. Tim. ii.
20.</note> in which there are not only vessels of gold
and silver, but also of wood and clay.
</p>

<p>
The Fathers repeat the teaching of Scripture.
St. Jerome says: <q>The ark of Noah was a type of
the Church. As every kind of animal was in that,
so in this there are men of every race and character.
As in that were the leopard and the kids, the
wolf and the lambs, so in this there are to be found
the just and the sinful&mdash;that is, vessels of gold and
silver along with those of wood and clay.</q><note place='foot'>Dial.
contra Lucif.</note>
</p>

<p>
St. Gregory the Great writes: <q>Because in it
(the Church) the good are mingled with the bad,
the reprobate with the elect, it is rightly declared
to be similar to the wise and the foolish virgins.</q><note place='foot'>Hom.
12, in Evang.</note>
</p>

<p>
Listen to St. Augustine: <q>Let the mind recall
the threshing-floor containing straw and wheat;
the nets in which are inclosed good and bad fish;
the ark of Noah in which were clean and unclean
animals, and you will see that the Church from
<pb n="026"/><anchor id="Pg026"/>
now until the judgment day <emph>contains not only
sheep and oxen</emph>&mdash;that is, saintly laymen and holy
ministers&mdash;<emph>but also the beasts of the field</emph>....
For the beasts of the field are men who take delight
in carnal pleasures, <emph>the field being that broad
way which leads to perdition</emph>.</q><note place='foot'>In
Ps. viii., ii. 13.</note>
</p>

<p>
The occasional scandals existing among members
of the Church do not invalidate or impair her
claim to the title of sanctity. The spots on the sun
do not mar his brightness. Neither do the moral
stains of some members sully the brilliancy of
her <q>who cometh forth as the morning star, fair as
the moon, bright as the sun.</q><note place='foot'>Cant.
vi. 9.</note> The cockle that
grows amidst the wheat does not destroy the
beauty of the ripened harvest. The sanctity of
Jesus was not sullied by the presence of Judas in
the Apostolic College. Neither can the moral corruption
of a few disciples tarnish the holiness of
the Church. St. Paul calls the Church of Corinth
a congregation of Saints,<note place='foot'>I.
Cor. i.</note> though he reproves
some scandalous members among them.<note place='foot'>I. Cor. v.</note>
</p>

<p>
It cannot be denied that corruption of morals
prevailed in the sixteenth century to such an extent
as to call for a sweeping reformation, and that
laxity of discipline invaded even the sanctuary.
</p>

<p>
But how was this reformation of morals to be
effected? Was it to be accomplished by a force
operating inside the Church, or outside? I answer
that the proper way of carrying out this reformation
was by battling against iniquity within
the Church; for there was not a single weapon
which men could use in waging war with vice outside
the Church, which they could not wield with
more effective power when fighting under the authority
of the Church. The true weapons of an
<pb n="027"/><anchor id="Pg027"/>
Apostle, at all times, have been personal virtue,
prayer, preaching, and the Sacraments. Every
genuine reformer had those weapons at his disposal
within the Church.
</p>

<p>
She possesses, at all times, not only the principle
of undying vitality, but, besides, all the elements
of reformation, and all the means of sanctification.
With the weapons I have named she purified
morals in the first century, and with the same
weapons she went to work with a right good will,
and effected a moral reformation in the sixteenth
century. She was the only effectual spiritual reformer
of that age.
</p>

<p>
What was the Council of Trent but a great reforming
tribunal? Most of its decrees are directed
to the reformation of abuses among the clergy and
the laity, and the salutary fruits of its legislation
are reaped even to this day.
</p>

<p>
St. Charles Borromeo, the nephew of a reigning
Pope, was the greatest reformer of his time. His
whole Episcopal career was spent in elevating the
morals of his clergy and people. Bartholomew,
Archbishop of Braga, in Portugal, preached an
incessant crusade against iniquity in high and low
places. St. Ignatius of Loyola and St. Alphonsus,
with their companions, were conspicuous and successful
reformers throughout Europe. St. Philip
Neri was called the modern Apostle of Rome because
of his happy efforts in dethroning vice in
that city. All these Catholic Apostles preach by
example as well as by word.
</p>

<p>
How do Luther and Calvin, and Zuinglius and
Knox, and Henry VIII. compare with these
genuine and saintly reformers, both as to their
moral character and the fruit or their labors?
The private lives of these pseudo-reformers were
stained by cruelty, rapine, and licentiousness; and
<pb n="028"/><anchor id="Pg028"/>
as the result of their propagandism, history
records civil wars, and bloodshed, and bitter religious
strife, and the dismemberment of Christianity
into a thousand sects.
</p>

<p>
Instead of co-operating with the lawful authorities
in extinguishing the flames which the passions
of men had enkindled in the city of God, these
faithless citizens fly from the citadel which they
had vowed to defend; then joining the enemy, they
hasten back to fan the conflagration, and to increase
the commotion. And they overturn the
very altars before which they previously sacrificed
as consecrated priests.<note place='foot'>Luther, Zuinglius,
and Knox had been ordained priests.
Calvin had studied for the priesthood, but did not receive
Orders.</note> They sanctioned rebellion
by undermining the principle of authority.
</p>

<p>
What a noble opportunity they lost of earning
for themselves immortal honors from God and
man! If, instead of raising the standard of revolt,
they had waged war upon their own passions,
and fought with the Catholic reformers against
impiety, they would be hailed as true soldiers of
the cross. They would be welcomed by the Pope,
the Bishops and clergy, and by all good men. They
might be honored today on our altars, and might
have a niche in our temples, side by side with
those of Charles Borromeo and Ignatius Loyola;
and instead of a divided army of Christians, we
should behold today a united Christendom, spreading
itself irresistibly from nation to nation, and
bringing all kingdoms to the knowledge of Jesus
Christ.
</p>

</div>

<pb n="029"/><anchor id="Pg029"/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc' level1='Chapter IV. Catholicity.'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='Chapter IV.'/>
<head type='sub'>Chapter IV.</head>
<head>Catholicity.</head>

<p>
That Catholicity is a prominent note of the
Church is evident from the Apostles' Creed,
which says: <q>I believe in the Holy <emph>Catholic</emph>
Church.</q> The word <hi rend='italic'>Catholic</hi>, or Universal, signifies
that the true Church is not circumscribed in
its extent, like human empires, nor confined to one
race of people, like the Jewish Church, but that she
is diffused over every nation of the globe, and
counts her children among all tribes and peoples
and tongues of the earth.
</p>

<p>
This glorious Church is foreshadowed by the
Psalmist, when he sings: <q>All the ends of the
earth shall be converted to the Lord, and all the
kindreds of the Gentiles shall adore in His sight;
for the kingdom is the Lord's, and He shall have
dominion over the nations.</q><note place='foot'>Ps. xii.</note> The Prophet
Malachy saw in the distant future this world-wide
Church, when he wrote: <q>From the rising of the
sun, to the going down, My name is great among
the Gentiles; and in <emph>every place</emph> there is sacrifice,
and there is offered to My name a clean oblation;
for My name is great among the Gentiles, saith the
Lord of Hosts.</q><note place='foot'>Mal. i. 11.</note>
</p>

<p>
When our Savior gave commission to his Apostles
He assigned to them the whole world as the
theatre of their labors, and the entire human race,
without regard to language, color, or nationality,
<pb n="030"/><anchor id="Pg030"/>
as the audience to whom they were to preach.
Unlike the religion of the Jewish people, which
was national, or that of the Mohammedans, which
is local, the Catholic religion was to be cosmopolitan,
embracing all nations and all countries. This
is evident from the following passages: <q>Go ye,
therefore, and teach <emph>all nations</emph>.</q><note place='foot'>Matt.
xxviii. 19.</note> <q>Go ye into
the <emph>whole world</emph>, and preach the Gospel to every
creature.</q><note place='foot'>Mark xvi. 15.</note> <q>Ye shall be witnesses unto Me in
Jerusalem, and in all Judea, and Samaria, and
even <emph>to the uttermost part of the earth</emph>.</q><note place='foot'>Acts
i. 8.</note>
</p>

<p>
These prophecies declaring that the Church was
to be world-wide and to embrace even the Gentile
nations may not strike us today as especially remarkable,
accustomed as we are now to meet with
Christian civilization everywhere, and to see the
nations of the world bound so closely together by
social and commercial relations. But we must remember
that when they were uttered the true God
was known and adored only in an obscure, almost
isolated, corner of the earth, while triumphant
idolatry was the otherwise universal religion of
the world.
</p>

<p>
The prophecies were fulfilled. The Apostles
scattered themselves over the surface of the earth,
preaching the Gospel of Christ. <q>Their sound,</q>
says St. Paul, <q>went over all the earth and their
words unto the ends of the whole world.</q><note place='foot'>Rom. x. 18.</note> Within
thirty years after our Savior's Crucifixion the
Apostle of the Gentiles was able to say to the
Romans: <q>I give thanks to my God through Jesus
Christ because your faith is spoken of in the entire
world</q><note place='foot'>Rom. i. 18.</note>&mdash;spoken of assuredly by those who
were in sympathy and communion with the faith
of the Romans.
</p>

<pb n="031"/><anchor id="Pg031"/>

<p>
St. Justin, Martyr, was able to say, about one
hundred years after Christ, that there was no race
of men, whether Barbarians or Greeks, or any
other people of what name soever, among whom
the name of Jesus Christ was not invoked.
</p>

<p>
St. Irenaeus, writing at the end of the second
century, tells us that the religion so marvelously
propagated throughout the whole world was not a
vague, ever-changing form of Christianity, but
that <q>this faith and doctrine and tradition
preached throughout the globe is as uniform as if
the Church consisted of one family, possessing one
soul, one heart, and as if she had but one mouth.
For, though the languages of the world are dissimilar,
her doctrine is the same. The churches founded
in Germany, in the Celtic nations, in the East
in Egypt, in Lybia, and in the centres of civilization,
do not differ from each other; but as the sun
gives the same light throughout the world, so does
the light of faith shine everywhere the same and
enlighten all men who wish to come to the knowledge
of the truth.</q><note place='foot'>Adv. Hær., i. 1.</note>
</p>

<p>
<q>We are but of yesterday,</q> says Tertullian,
<q>and already have we filled your cities, towns, islands,
your council halls and camps ... the palace,
senate, forum; we have left you only the temples.</q><note place='foot'>Apologet.
c. 37.</note>
</p>

<p>
Clement of Alexandria, at the end of the second
century, writes: <q>The word of our Master did not
remain in Judea, as philosophy remained in Greece,
but has been poured out over the whole world, persuading
Greeks and Barbarians alike, race by race,
village by village, every city, whole houses and
hearers one by one&mdash;nay, not a few of the philosophers
themselves.</q>
</p>

<p>
And Origen, in the early part of the next century,
observes: <q>In all Greece, and in all barbarous races
within our world, there are tens of thousands who
<pb n="032"/><anchor id="Pg032"/>
have left their national law and customary gods
for the law of Moses and the Word of Jesus
Christ, though to adhere to that law is to incur the
hatred of idolaters and the risk of death besides
to have embraced that Word; and considering how,
in so few years, in spite of the attack made on us,
even to the loss of life or property, and with no
great store of teachers, the preaching of that Word
has found its way into every part of the world, so
that Greek and Barbarian, wise and unwise, adhere
to the religion of Jesus, doubtless it is a work
greater than any work of man.</q>
</p>

<p>
This Catholicity, or universality, is not to be
found in any, or in all, of the combined communions
separated from the Roman Catholic Church.
</p>

<p>
The Schismatic churches of the East have no
claim to this title because they are confined within
the Turkish and Russian dominions, and number
not more than sixty million souls.
</p>

<p>
The Protestant churches, even taken collectively,
(as separate communions they are a mere handful)
are too insignificant in point of numbers, and
too circumscribed in their territorial extent, to
have any pretensions to the title of Catholic. All
the Protestant denominations are estimated at
sixty-five million, or less than one-fifth of those
who bear the Christian name. They repudiate,
moreover, and protest against the name of Catholic,
though they continue to say in the Apostles'
Creed <q>I believe in the Holy Catholic Church.</q>
</p>

<p>
That the Roman Catholic Church alone deserves
the name of <hi rend='italic'>Catholic</hi> is so evident that it is ridiculous
to deny it. Ours is the only Church which
adopts this name as her official title. We have possession,
which is nine-tenths of the law. We have
exclusively borne this glorious appellation in troubled
<pb n="033"/><anchor id="Pg033"/>
times, when the assumption of this venerable
title exposed us to insult, persecution and death;
and to attempt to deprive us of it at this late hour,
would be as fruitless as the efforts of the French
Revolutionists who sought to uproot all traces of
the old civilization by assigning new names to the
days and seasons of the year.
</p>

<p>
Passion and prejudice and bad manners may
affix to us the epithets of <hi rend='italic'>Romish</hi> and
<hi rend='italic'>Papist</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>Ultramontane</hi>, but the calm,
dispassionate mind, of whatever faith, all the world, over, knows us
only by the name of <hi rend='italic'>Catholic</hi>. There is a power in
this name and an enthusiasm aroused by it akin
to the patriotism awakened by the flag of one's
country.
</p>

<p>
So great is the charm attached to the name of
Catholic that a portion of the Episcopal body
sometimes usurp the title of <hi rend='italic'>Catholic</hi>, though in
their official books they are named <hi rend='italic'>Protestant
Episcopalians</hi>. If they think that they have any
just claim to the name of <hi rend='italic'>Catholic</hi>, why not come
out openly and write it on the title-pages of their
Bibles and Prayer-Books? Afraid of going so far,
they gratify their vanity by privately calling
themselves Catholic. But the delusion is so transparent
that the attempt must provoke a smile even
among themselves.
</p>

<p>
Should a stranger ask them to direct him to the
Catholic Church they would instinctively point out
to him the Roman Catholic Church.
</p>

<p>
The sectarians of the fourth and fifth centuries,
as St. Augustine tells us, used to attempt the same
pious fraud, but signally failed:
</p>

<p>
<q>We must hold fast to the Christian religion
and to the communion of that Church which is
Catholic, and which is called Catholic not only by
those who belong to her, but also by all her enemies.
<pb n="034"/><anchor id="Pg034"/>
Whether they will it or not the very heretics
themselves and followers of schism, when they
converse, not with their own but with outsiders,
call that only Catholic which is really Catholic.
For they cannot be understood unless they distinguish
her by that name, by which she is known
throughout the whole earth.</q><note place='foot'>St.
Aug. de Ver. Rel., c. 7. n. 12.</note>
</p>

<p>
We possess not only the name, but also the
reality. A single illustration will suffice to exhibit
in a strong light the widespread dominion of the
Catholic Church and her just claims to the title of
<hi rend='italic'>Catholic</hi>. Take the Ecumenical Council of the Vatican,
opened in 1869 and presided over by Pope
Pius IX. Of the thousand Bishops and upwards
now comprising the hierarchy of the Catholic
Church, nearly eight hundred attended the opening
session, the rest being unavoidably absent. All
parts of the habitable globe were represented at
the Council.
</p>

<p>
The Bishops assembled from Great Britain, Ireland,
France, Germany, Switzerland and from almost
every nation and principality in Europe.
They met from Canada, the United States, Mexico
and South America, and from the islands of the
Atlantic and the Pacific. They were gathered together
from different parts of Africa and Oceanica.
They went from the banks of the Tigris and
Euphrates, the cradle of the human race, and from
the banks of the Jordan, the cradle of Christianity.
They traveled to Rome from Mossul, built near
ancient Nineveh, and from Bagdad, founded on
the ruins of Babylon. They flocked from Damascus
and Mount Libanus and from the Holy Land,
sanctified by the footprints of our blessed Redeemer.
</p>

<p>
Those Bishops belonged to every form of government,
<pb n="035"/><anchor id="Pg035"/>
from the republic to the most absolute
monarchy.<note place='foot'>Does not this fact conclusively demonstrate the truth that
the Catholic Church can subsist under every form of government?
And is it not an eloquent refutation of the oft repeated
calumny that a republic is not a favorable soil for her
development?</note> Their faces were marked by almost
every shade and color that distinguished the human
family. They spoke every civilized language
under the sun. Kneeling together in the same
great Council-Hall, truly could those Prelates exclaim,
in the language of the Apocalypse: <q>Thou
hast redeemed us, O Lord, to God in Thy blood,
out of every tribe, and tongue, and people, and
nation.</q><note place='foot'>Apoc. v. 9.</note>
</p>

<p>
What the Catholic Church lost by the religious
revolution of the sixteenth century in the old
world she has more than regained by the immense
accessions to her ranks in the East and West
Indies, in North and South America.
</p>

<p>
Never, in her long history, was she numerically
so strong as she is at the present moment, when her
children amount to about three hundred millions,
or double the number of those who bear the name
of Christians outside of her communion.
</p>

<p>
In her alone is literally fulfilled the magnificent
prophecy of Malachy; for in every clime, and in
every nation under the sun, are erected thousands
of Catholic altars upon which the <q>clean oblation</q><note place='foot'>Malachy
i. 11.</note> is daily offered up to the Most High.
</p>

<p>
It is said, with truth, that the sun never sets on
British dominions. It may also be affirmed, with
equal assurance, that wherever the British drum-beat
sounds, aye, and wherever the English language
is spoken, there you will find the English-speaking
Catholic Missionary planting the cross&mdash;the
<pb n="036"/><anchor id="Pg036"/>
symbol of salvation&mdash;side by side with the
banner of St. George.
</p>

<p>
Quite recently a number of European emigrants
arrived in Richmond. They were strangers to our
country, to our customs and to our language.
Every object that met their eye sadly reminded
them that they were far from their own sunny
Italy. But when they saw the cross surmounting
our Cathedral they hastened to it with a joyful
step. I saw and heard a group of them giving
earnest expression to their deep emotions. Entering
this sacred temple, they felt that they had
found an oasis in the desert. Once more they were
at home. They found one familiar spot in a
strange land. They stood in the church of their
fathers, in the home of their childhood; and they
seemed to say in their hearts, as a tear trickled
down their sun-burnt cheeks, <q>How lovely are
thy tabernacles, O Lord of Hosts! My soul longeth
and fainteth for the courts of the Lord. My
heart and my flesh have rejoiced in the living
God.</q><note place='foot'>Ps.
lxxxiii.</note> They saw around them the paintings of
familiar Saints whom they had been accustomed
to reverence from their youth. They saw the
baptismal font and the confessionals. They beheld
the altar and the altar-rails where they received
their Maker. They observed the Priest
at the altar in his sacred vestments. They saw
a multitude of worshipers kneeling around them,
and they felt in their heart of hearts that they
were once more among brothers and sisters, with
whom they had <q>one Lord, one faith, one baptism,
one God and Father of all.</q>
</p>

<p>
Everywhere a Catholic is at home. Secret societies,
of whatever name, form but a weak and
counterfeit bond of union compared with the
<pb n="037"/><anchor id="Pg037"/>
genuine fellowship created by Catholic faith, hope
and charity.
</p>

<p>
The Roman Catholic Church, then, exclusively
merits the title of Catholic, because her children
abound in every part of the globe and comprise
the vast majority of the Christian family.
</p>

<p>
God forbid that I should write these lines, or
that my Catholic readers should peruse them in a
boasting and vaunting spirit. God estimates men
not by their numbers, but by their intrinsic worth.
It is no credit to us to belong to the body of the
Church Catholic if we are not united to the soul of
the Church by a life of faith, hope and charity. It
will avail us nothing to be citizens of that Kingdom
of Christ which encircles the globe, unless the
Kingdom of God is within us by the reign of the
Holy Spirit in our hearts.
</p>

<p>
One righteous soul that reflects the beauty and
perfections of the Lord, is more precious in His
sight than the mass of humanity that has no spiritual
life, and is dead to the inspirations of grace.
</p>

<p>
The Patriarch Abraham was dearer to Jehovah
than all the inhabitants of the corrupt city of
Sodom.
</p>

<p>
Elias was of greater worth before the Almighty
than the four hundred prophets of Baal who ate at
the table of Jezabel.
</p>

<p>
The Apostles with the little band of disciples
that were assembled in Jerusalem after our Lord's
ascension, were more esteemed by Him than the
great Roman Empire, which was seated in darkness
and the shadow of death.
</p>

<p>
While we rejoice, then, in the inestimable blessing
of being incorporated in the visible body of
the Catholic Church, whose spiritual treasures are
inexhaustible, let us rejoice still more that we have
not received that blessing in vain.
</p>

</div>

<pb n="038"/><anchor id="Pg038"/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc' level1='Chapter V. Apostolicity.'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='Chapter V.'/>
<head type='sub'>Chapter V.</head>
<head>Apostolicity.</head>

<p>
The true Church must be Apostolical. Hence
in the Creed framed in the first Ecumenical
Council of Nicæa, in the year 325, we find
these words: <q>I believe in the One, Holy, Catholic
and <hi rend='italic'>Apostolic</hi> Church.</q>
</p>

<p>
This attribute or note of the Church implies
that the true Church must always teach the identical
doctrines once delivered by the Apostles, and
that her ministers must derive their powers from
the Apostles by an uninterrupted succession.
</p>

<p>
Consequently, no church can claim to be the true
one whose doctrines differ from those of the Apostles,
or whose ministers are unable to trace, by an
unbroken chain, their authority to an Apostolic
source; just as our Minister to England can exercise
no authority in that country unless he is duly
commissioned by our Government and represents
its views.
</p>

<p>
The Church, says St. Paul, is <q>built upon the
foundation of the Apostles,</q><note place='foot'>Eph.
ii. 20.</note> so that the doctrine
which it propagates must be based on Apostolic
teachings. Hence St. Paul says to the Galatians:
<q>Though an angel from heaven preach a
Gospel to you beside that which we have preached
to you, let him be anathema.</q><note place='foot'>Gal.
i. 8.</note> The same Apostle
gives this admonition to Timothy: <q>The things
<pb n="039"/><anchor id="Pg039"/>
which thou hast heard from me before many witnesses
the <emph>same</emph> commend to faithful men who
shall be fit to teach others also.</q><note place='foot'>II.
Tim. ii. 2.</note> Timothy must
transmit to his disciples only such doctrines as
he heard from the lips of his Master.
</p>

<p>
Not only is it required that ministers of the
Gospel should conform their teaching to the doctrine
of the Apostles, but also that these ministers
should be ordained and commissioned by the
Apostles or their legitimate successors. <q>Neither
doth any man,</q> says the Apostle, <q>take the honor
to himself, but he that is called by God, as Aaron
was.</q><note place='foot'>Heb. v.
4.</note> This text evidently condemns all self-constituted
preachers and reformers; for, <q>how
shall they preach, unless they be sent?</q><note place='foot'>Rom.
x. 15.</note> <hi rend='italic'>Sent</hi>,
of course, by legitimate authority, and not directed
by their own caprice. Hence, we find that
those who succeeded the Apostles were ordained
and commissioned by them to preach, and that no
others were permitted to exercise this function.
Thus we are told that Paul and Barnabas <q>had
ordained for them priests in every church.</q><note place='foot'>Acts xiv. 22.</note>
And the Apostle says to Titus: <q>For this cause
I left thee in Crete, ... that thou shouldst ordain
Priests in every city, as I also appointed
thee.</q><note place='foot'>Tit. i.
5.</note> Even St. Paul himself, though miraculously
called and instructed by God, had hands
imposed on him,<note place='foot'>Acts xiii.
2, 3.</note> lest others should be tempted
by his example to preach without Apostolic warrant.
</p>

<p>
To discover, therefore, the Church of Christ
among the various conflicting claimants we have
to inquire, first, which church teaches whole and
entire those doctrines that were taught by the
Apostles; second, what ministers can trace back,
<pb n="040"/><anchor id="Pg040"/>
in an unbroken line, their missionary powers to
the Apostles.
</p>

<p>
The Catholic Church <emph>alone</emph> teaches doctrines
which are <emph>in all respects</emph> identical with those of
the first teachers of the Gospel. The following
parallel lines exhibit some examples of the departure
of the Protestant bodies from the primitive
teachings of Christianity, and the faithful adhesion
of the Catholic Church to them.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3cm} p{3cm} p{3cm}';
             tblcolumns: 'lw(23) lw(23) lw(23)'">
<row><cell>Apostolic Church.</cell><cell>Catholic Church.</cell>
     <cell>Protestant Churches.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>1. Our Savior gives pre-eminence to Peter over the other Apostles:
       <q>I will give to thee the keys of the kingdom of
       heaven.</q><note place='foot'>Matt. xvi. 18.</note> <q>Confirm
       thy brethren.</q><note place='foot'>Luke xxii. 32.</note> <q>Feed
       My lambs; feed My sheep.</q><note place='foot'>John xxi. 15.</note></cell>
     <cell>The Catholic Church gives the primacy of honor and jurisdiction
        to Peter and to his successors.</cell>
     <cell>All other Christian communions practically deny Peter's supremacy
       over the other Apostles.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>2. The Apostolic Church claimed to be infallible in her teachings. Hence the
       Apostles spoke with unerring authority, and their words were received not as
       human opinions, but as Divine truths. <q>When you have received from us the
       word of God, you received it not as the word of men, but (as it is indeed) the
       word of God.</q><note place='foot'>Thess. ii. 13.</note> <q>It hath seemed good
       to the Holy Ghost and to us,</q> say the assembled Apostles, <q>to lay no further
       burden upon you than these necessary things.</q><note place='foot'>Acts xv.
       28.</note> <q>Though an angel from heaven preach a gospel to you besides that
       which we have preached to you, let him be anathema.</q><note place='foot'>Gal.
       i. 8.</note></cell>
     <cell>The Catholic Church alone, of all the Christian communions, claims to
       exercise the prerogative of infallibility in her teaching. Her ministers always
       speak from the pulpit as having authority, and the faithful receive with implicit
       confidence what the Church teaches, without once questioning her veracity.</cell>
    <cell>All the Protestant churches repudiate the claim of infallibility. They deny
      that such a gift is possessed by any teachers of religion. The ministers pronounce
      no authoritative doctrines, but advance opinions as embodying their private
      interpretation of the Scripture. And their hearers are never required to believe
      them, but are expected to draw their own conclusions from the Bible.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>3. Our Savior enjoins and prescribes rules for fasting: <q>When thou fastest,
       anoint thy head and wash thy face, that thou appear not to men to fast ... and
       thy Father, who seeth in secret, will repay thee.</q><note place='foot'>Matt. vi.
       17.</note> The Apostles fasted before engaging in sacred functions: <q>They
       ministered to the Lord, and fasted.</q><note place='foot'>Acts xiii. 2.</note>
       <q>And when they ordained Priests in every city, they prayed with
       fasting.</q><note place='foot'>Acts xiv. 22.</note></cell>
     <cell>The Church prescribes fasting to the faithful at stated seasons, particularly
       during Lent. A Catholic priest is always fasting when he officiates at the altar.
       He breaks his fast only after he says Mass. When Bishops ordain Priests they are
       always fasting, as well as the candidates for ordination.</cell>
     <cell>Protestants have no law prescribing fasts, though some may fast from private
       devotion. They even try to cast ridicule on fasting as a work of supererogation,
       detracting from the merits of Christ. Neither candidates for ordination, nor the
       ministers who ordain them, ever fast on such occasions.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>4. <q>Let women,</q> says the Apostle, <q>keep silence in the churches. For,
       it is not permitted them to speak ... It is a shame for a woman to speak in the
       church.</q><note place='foot'>I. Cor. xiv. 34, 35.</note></cell>
     <cell>The Catholic Church never permits women to preach in the house of God.</cell>
     <cell>Women, especially in this country, publicly preach in Methodist and other
       churches with the sanction of the church elders.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>5. St. Peter and St. John confirmed the newly baptized in Samaria: <q>They
       laid hands on them and they received the Holy Ghost.</q><note place='foot'>Acts
       viii. 17.</note></cell>
     <cell>Every Catholic Bishop, as a successor of the Apostles, likewise imposes hands
       on baptized persons in the Sacrament of Confirmation, by which they receive the
       Holy Ghost.</cell>
     <cell>No denomination performs the ceremony of imposing hands in this country except
       Episcopalians, and even they do not recognize Confirmation as a
       Sacrament.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>6. Our Savior and His Apostles taught that the Eucharist contains the Body
       and Blood of Christ: <q>Take ye, and eat; this is My Body.... Drink ye all of
       this, for this is my Blood.</q><note place='foot'>Matt. xxvi. 26-28.</note>
       <q>The chalice of benediction which we bless, is it not the communion of the
       Blood of Christ; and the bread which we break, is it not the participation of the
       Body of the Lord?</q><note place='foot'>I. Cor. x. 16.</note></cell>
     <cell>The Catholic Church teaches, with our Lord and His Apostles, that the
       Eucharist contains really and indeed the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ under the
       appearance of bread and wine.</cell>
     <cell>The Protestant churches (except, perhaps, a few Ritualists) condemn the
       doctrine of the Real Presence as idolatrous, and say that, in partaking of the
       communion, we receive a memorial of Christ.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>7. The Apostles were empowered by our Savior to forgive sins:&mdash;<q>Whose
       sins ye shall forgive, they are forgiven.</q><note place='foot'>John xx.
       28.</note> <q>God,</q> says St. Paul, <q>hath given to us the ministry of
       reconciliation.</q><note place='foot'>II. Cor. v. 18.</note></cell>
     <cell>The Bishops and Priests of the Catholic Church, as the inheritors of
       Apostolic prerogatives, profess to exercise the ministry of reconciliation, and
       to forgive sins in the name of Christ.</cell>
     <cell>Protestants affirm, on the contrary, that God delegates to no man
       the power of pardoning sin.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>8. Regarding the sick, St. James gives this instruction: <q>Is any man sick
      among you, let him bring in the priests of the Church, and let them pray over him,
      anointing him with oil in the name of the Lord.</q><note place='foot'>James v.
      14.</note></cell>
    <cell>One of the most ordinary duties of a Catholic Priest is to anoint the sick in
      the Sacrament of Extreme Unction. If a man is sick among us he is careful to call
      in the Priest of the Church, that he may anoint him with oil in the name of the
      Lord.</cell>
    <cell>No such ceremony as that of anointing the sick is practised by any Protestant
      denomination, notwithstanding the Apostle's injunction.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>9. Of marriage our Savior says: <q>Whoever shall put away his wife and marry
       another committeth adultery against her. And if the wife shall put away her
       husband and be married to another she committeth
       adultery.</q><note place='foot'>Mark x. 11, 12.</note> And again St. Paul says:
       <q>To them that are married ... the Lord commandeth that the wife depart not from
       her husband, and if she depart that she remain unmarried.... And let not the
       husband put away his wife.</q><note place='foot'>I. Cor. vii, 10,
       11.</note></cell>
     <cell>Literally following the Apostle's injunction, the Catholic Church forbids the
       husband and wife to separate from one another; or, if they separate, neither of
       them can marry again during the life of the other.</cell>
     <cell>The Protestant churches, as is well known, have so far relaxed this rigorous
       law of the Gospel as to allow divorced persons to remarry. And divorce
       <hi rend='italic'>a vinculo</hi> is granted on various and even trifling
       pretenses.</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>10. Our Lord recommends not only by word, but by His example, to souls aiming
       at perfection, the state of perpetual virginity. St. Paul also exhorts the
       Corinthians by counsel and his own example to the same angelic virtue: <q>He
       that giveth his virgin in marriage,</q> he says, <q>doeth well. And he that
       giveth her not doeth better.</q><note place='foot'>I. Cor. vii.</note></cell>
     <cell>Like the Apostle and his Master, the Catholic clergy bind themselves to a
       life of perpetual chastity. The inmates of our convents of men and women
       voluntarily consecrate their virginity to God.</cell>
     <cell>All the ministers of other denominations, with very rare exceptions, marry.
       And far from inculcating the Apostolic counsel of celibacy to any of their
       flock, they more than insinuate that the virtue of perpetual chastity, though
       recommended by St. Paul, is impracticable.</cell></row>
</table>

<p>
We now leave the reader to judge for himself
which Church enforces the doctrines of the Apostles
in all their pristine vigor.
</p>

<p>
To show that the Catholic Church is the only
lineal descendant of the Apostles it is sufficient to
demonstrate that she alone can trace her pedigree,
generation after generation, to the Apostles,
while the origin of all other Christian communities
can be referred to a comparatively modern
date.
</p>

<p>
The most influential Christian sects existing in
this country at the present time are the Lutherans,
Episcopalians, Methodists, Presbyterians and
Baptists. The other Protestant denominations
are comparatively insignificant in point of numbers,
and are for the most part offshoots from the
Christian communities just named.
</p>

<p>
Martin Luther, a Saxon monk, was the founder
of the church which bears his name. He was
born at Eisleben, in Saxony, in 1483, and died
in 1546.
</p>

<p>
The Anglican or Episcopal Church owes its
origin to Henry VIII. of England. The immediate
cause of his renunciation of the Roman
Church was the refusal of Pope Clement to
grant him a divorce from his lawful wife, Catharine
<pb n="044"/><anchor id="Pg044"/>
of Aragon, that he might be free to be joined
in wedlock to Anne Boleyn. In order to legalize
his divorce from his virtuous queen the licentious
monarch divorced himself and his kingdom from
the spiritual supremacy of the Pope.
</p>

<p>
<q>There is a close relationship,</q> says D'Aubigné,
<q>between these two divorces,</q> meaning
Henry's divorce from his wife and England's divorce
from the Church. Yes, there is the relationship
of cause and effect.
</p>

<p>
Bishop Short, an Anglican historian, candidly
admits that <q>the existence of the Church of England
as a distinct body, and her final separation
from Rome, may <emph>be dated</emph> from the period of the
divorce.</q><note place='foot'>History of the Church of
England, by Thomas. V. Short, Bishop of St. Asaph's, p. 44.</note>
</p>

<p>
The Book of Homilies, in the language of fulsome
praise, calls Henry <q>the true and faithful
minister,</q> and gives him the credit for having
abolished in England the Papal supremacy and
established the new order of things.<note place='foot'>Book of Homilies.</note>
</p>

<p>
John Wesley is the acknowledged founder of the
Methodist Church. Methodism dates from the
year 1729, and its cradle was the Oxford University
in England. John and Charles Wesley were
students at Oxford. They gathered around them
a number of young men who devoted themselves
to the frequent reading of the Holy Scriptures
and to prayer. Their methodical and exact mode
of life obtained for them the name of <hi rend='italic'>Methodists</hi>.
The Methodist Church in this country is the offspring
of a colony sent hither from England.
</p>

<p>
As it would be tedious to give even a succinct
history of each sect, I shall content myself with
presenting a tabular statement exhibiting the
<pb n="045"/><anchor id="Pg045"/>
name and founder of each denomination, the place
and date of its origin, and the names of the authors
from whom I quote. My authorities in every
instance are Protestants.
</p>

<pb n="046"/><anchor id="Pg046"/>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{1.5cm} p{1.5cm} p{1.8cm} p{1.3cm} p{1.9cm}';
             tblcolumns: 'lw(7) lw(7) lw(7) lw(6) lw(8)'">
<row><cell>Name of Sect.</cell><cell>Place of Origin.</cell><cell>Founder.</cell>
     <cell>Year.</cell><cell>Authority Quoted.</cell></row>
<row><cell>Anabaptists</cell><cell>Germany</cell><cell>Nicolas Stork</cell>
     <cell>1521</cell><cell>Vincent L. Milner, <q>Religious
     Denominations.</q></cell></row>
<row><cell>Baptists</cell><cell>Rhode Island</cell><cell>Roger Williams</cell>
     <cell>1639</cell><cell><q>The Book of Religions</q> by John Hayward.</cell></row>
<row><cell>Free-Will Baptists</cell><cell>New Hampshire</cell><cell>Benj. Randall</cell>
     <cell>1780</cell><cell>Ibid.</cell></row>
<row><cell>Free Communion Baptists</cell><cell>New York</cell><cell>Benijah Corp</cell>
     <cell>Close of 18th century</cell>
     <cell>Rev. A. D. Williams in <q>History of all Denominations.</q></cell></row>
<row><cell>Seventh-Day Baptists</cell><cell>United States</cell>
     <cell>General Conference</cell><cell>1833</cell>
     <cell>W. B. Gillett, Ibid.</cell></row>
<row><cell>Campbellites, or Christians</cell><cell>Virginia</cell>
     <cell>Alex. Campbell</cell><cell>1813</cell>
     <cell><q>Book of Religions.</q></cell></row>
<row><cell>Methodist Episcopal</cell><cell>England</cell><cell>John Wesley</cell>
     <cell>1739</cell>
     <cell>Rev. Nathan Bangs in <q>History of all Denominations.</q></cell></row>
<row><cell>Reformed Methodist</cell><cell>Vermont</cell>
     <cell>Branch of the Meth. Episcopal Church</cell><cell>1814</cell>
     <cell>Ibid.</cell></row>
<row><cell>Methodist Society</cell><cell>New York</cell><cell>Do.</cell><cell>1820</cell>
     <cell>Rev. W. M. Stilwell, Ibid.</cell></row>
<row><cell>Methodist Protestant</cell><cell>Baltimore</cell><cell>Do.</cell>
     <cell>1830</cell><cell>James R. Williams, Ibid.</cell></row>
<row><cell>True Wesleyan Methodist</cell><cell>New York</cell>
     <cell>Delegates from Methodist denominations</cell><cell>1843</cell>
     <cell>J. Timberman, Ibid.</cell></row>
<row><cell>Presbyterian (Old School)</cell><cell>Scotland</cell>
     <cell>General Assembly</cell><cell>1560</cell>
     <cell>John M. Krebs, Ibid.</cell></row>
<row><cell>Presbyterian (New School)</cell><cell>Philadelphia</cell>
     <cell>General Assembly</cell><cell>1840</cell>
     <cell>Joel Parker, D. D., Ibid.</cell></row>
<row><cell>Episcopalian</cell><cell>England</cell><cell>Henry VIII</cell>
     <cell>1534</cell><cell>Macaulay and other English Historians.</cell></row>
<row><cell>Lutheran</cell><cell>Germany</cell><cell>Martin Luther</cell><cell>1524</cell>
     <cell>S. S. Schmucker in <q>History of all Denominations.</q></cell></row>
<row><cell>Unitarian Congrega- tionalists</cell><cell>Germany</cell><cell>Celatius</cell>
     <cell>About 1540</cell><cell>Alvan Lamson, Ibid.</cell></row>
<row><cell>Congrega- tionalists</cell><cell>England</cell><cell>Robert Browne</cell>
     <cell>1583</cell><cell>E. W. Andrews, Ibid.</cell></row>
<row><cell>Quakers</cell><cell>England</cell><cell>George Fox</cell><cell>1647</cell>
     <cell>English Historians.</cell></row>
<row><cell>Do</cell><cell>America</cell><cell>William Penn</cell><cell>1681</cell>
     <cell>American Historians.</cell></row>
<row><cell>Catholic Church</cell><cell>Jerusalem</cell><cell>Jesus</cell><cell>33</cell>
     <cell>New Testament.</cell></row>
</table>

<pb n="047"/><anchor id="Pg047"/>

<p>
From this brief historical tableau we find that
all the Christian <hi rend='italic'>sects</hi> now existing in the United
States had their origin since the year 1500. Consequently,
the oldest body of Christians among us,
outside the Catholic Church, is not yet four centuries
old. They all, therefore, come fifteen centuries
too late to have any pretensions to be called
the Apostolic Church.
</p>

<p>
But I may be told: <q>Though our public history
as Protestants dates from the Reformation, we
can trace our origin back to the Apostles.</q> This
I say is impossible. First of all, the very name
you bear betrays your recent birth; for who ever
heard of a Baptist or an Episcopal, or any other
Protestant church, prior to the Reformation?
Nor can you say: <q>We existed in every age as
an invisible church.</q> Your concealment, indeed,
was so complete that no man can tell, to this
day, where you lay hid for sixteen centuries. But
even if you did exist you could not claim to be
the Church of Christ; for our Lord predicted that
His Church should ever be as a city placed upon
the mountain top, that all might see it, and that
its ministers should preach the truths of salvation
from the watch-towers thereof, that all might
hear them.
</p>

<p>
It is equally in vain to tell me that you were
allied in faith to the various Christian sects that
went out from the Catholic Church from age to
age; for these sects proclaimed doctrines diametrically
opposed to one another, and the true
Church must be one in faith. And besides, the
less relationship you claim with many of these
seceders the better for you, as they all advocated
errors against Christian truth, and some of them
disseminated principles at variance with <hi rend='italic'>decency</hi>
and morality.
</p>

<pb n="048"/><anchor id="Pg048"/>

<p>
The Catholic Church, on the contrary, can easily
vindicate the title of Apostolic, because she derives
her origin from the Apostles. Every Priest
and Bishop can trace his genealogy to the first disciples
of Christ with as much facility as the most
remote branch of a vine can be traced to the main
stem.
</p>

<p>
All the Catholic Clergy in the United States,
for instance, were ordained only by Bishops who
are in active communion with the See of Rome.
These Bishops themselves received their commissions
from the Bishop of Rome. The present
Bishop of Rome, Pius IX., is the successor of
Gregory XVI., who succeeded Pius VIII., who
was the successor of Leo XII. And thus we go
back from century to century till we come to Peter,
the first Bishop of Rome, Prince of the Apostles
and Vicar of Christ. Like the Evangelist Luke,
who traces the genealogy of our Savior back to
Adam and to God, we can trace the pedigree of
Pius IX. to Peter and to Christ. There is not a
link wanting in the chain which binds the humblest
Priest in the land to the Prince of the Apostles.
And although on a few occasions there happened
to be two or even three claimants for the chair
of Peter, these counter-claims could no more affect
the validity of the legitimate Pope than the
struggle of two contestants for the Presidency
could invalidate the title of the recognized Chief
Magistrate.
</p>

<p>
It was by pursuing this line of argument that
the early Fathers demonstrated the Apostolicity
of the Catholic Church, and refuted the pretensions
of contemporary sectaries. St. Irenæus,
Tertullian and St. Augustine give catalogues of
the Bishops of Rome who flourished up to their
respective times, with whom it was their happiness
<pb n="049"/><anchor id="Pg049"/>
to be in communion, and then they challenged
their opponents to trace their lineage to the Apostolic
See. <q>Let them,</q> says Tertullian, in the
second century, <q>produce the origin of their
church. Let them exhibit the succession of their
Bishops, so that the first of them may appear to
have been ordained by an <hi rend='italic'>Apostle, or by an apostolic
man who was in communion with the Apostles</hi>.</q><note place='foot'>Lib.
de Præscrip., c. 32.</note>
</p>

<p>
And if the Fathers of the fifth century considered
it a powerful argument in their favor that
they could refer to an uninterrupted line of fifty
Bishops who occupied the See of Rome, how much
stronger is the argument to us who can now exhibit
five times that number of Roman Pontiffs
who have sat in the chair of Peter! I would affectionately
repeat to my separated brethren what
Augustine said to the Donatists of his time:
<q>Come to us, brethren if you wish to be engrafted
in the vine. We are afflicted in beholding you
lying cut off from it. Count over the Bishops
from the very See of St. Peter, and mark, in this
list of Fathers, how one succeeded the other.
This is the rock against which the proud gates of
hell do not prevail.</q><note place='foot'>Psal. contra part Donati.</note>
</p>

</div>

<pb n="050"/><anchor id="Pg050"/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc' level1='Chapter VI. Perpetuity Of The Church.'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='Chapter VI.'/>
<head type='sub'>Chapter VI.</head>
<head>Perpetuity Of The Church.</head>

<p>
Perpetuity, or duration till the end of
time, is one of the most striking marks of
the Church. By perpetuity is not meant
merely that Christianity in one form or another
was always to exist, but that the Church was to
remain forever in its <emph>integrity</emph>, clothed with <emph>all</emph>
those attributes which God gave it in the beginning.
For, if the Church lost any of her essential
characteristics, such as her unity and sanctity,
which our Lord imparted to her at the commencement
of her existence, she could not be said
to be perpetual because she would not be the same
Institution.
</p>

<p>
The unceasing duration of the Church of Christ
is frequently foretold in Sacred Scripture. The
Angel Gabriel announces to Mary that Christ
<q>shall reign over the house of Jacob <emph>forever</emph>,
and of his kingdom <emph>there shall be no end</emph>.</q><note place='foot'>Luke
i. 32, 33.</note> Our
Savior said to Peter: <q>Thou art Peter, and upon
this rock I will build My Church, and the gates
of hell shall not prevail against it.</q><note place='foot'>Matt. xvi.
18.</note> Our blessed
Lord clearly intimates here that the Church is
destined to be assailed always, but to be overcome,
never.
</p>

<p>
In the last words recorded of our Redeemer in
the Gospel of St. Matthew the same prediction is
<pb n="051"/><anchor id="Pg051"/>
strongly repeated, and the reason of the Church's
indefectibility is fully expressed: <q>Go ye, teach
all nations, ... and behold I am with you <emph>all
days</emph>, even <emph>to the consummation</emph> of the
world.</q><note place='foot'>Matt. xxviii. 20.</note>
This sentence contains three important declarations:
First&mdash;The presence of Christ with His
Church&mdash;<q>Behold, I am with you.</q> Second&mdash;His
constant presence, without an interval of one
day's absence&mdash;<q>I am with you all days.</q> Third&mdash;His
perpetual presence to the end of the world,
and consequently the perpetual duration of the
Church&mdash;<q>Even to the consummation of the
world.</q>
</p>

<p>
Hence it follows that the true Church must
have existed from the beginning; it must have
had not one day's interval of suspended animation,
or separation from Christ, and must live
to the end of time.
</p>

<p>
None of the Christian Communions outside the
Catholic Church can have any reasonable claim
to <emph>Perpetuity</emph>, since, as we have seen in the preceding
chapter, they are all<note place='foot'>Except some
Oriental sects dating back to the fifth and
ninth centuries.</note> of recent origin.
</p>

<p>
The indestructibility of the Catholic Church is
truly marvellous and well calculated to excite the
admiration of every reflecting mind, when we consider
the number and variety, and the formidable
power of the enemies with whom she had to contend
from her very birth to the present time; this
fact alone stamps divinity on her brow.
</p>

<p>
The Church has been constantly engaged in a
double warfare, one foreign, the other domestic&mdash;in
foreign war against Paganism and infidelity;
in civil strife against heresy and schism fomented
by her own rebellious children.
</p>

<pb n="052"/><anchor id="Pg052"/>

<p>
From the day of Pentecost till the victory of
Constantine the Great over Maxentius, embracing
a period of about two hundred and eighty years,
the Church underwent a series of ten persecutions
unparalleled for atrocity in the annals of
history. Every torture that malice could invent
was resorted to, that every vestige of Christianity
might be eradicated. <hi rend='italic'><q>Christianos ad leones,</q>
the Christians to the lions</hi>, was the popular war-cry.
</p>

<p>
They were clothed in the skins of wild beasts,
and thus exposed to be devoured by dogs. They
were covered with pitch and set on fire to serve
as lamp-posts to the streets of Rome. To justify
such atrocities, and to smother all sentiments of
compassion, these persecutors accused their innocent
victims of the most appalling crimes.
</p>

<p>
For three centuries the Christians were obliged
to worship God in the secrecy of their chambers,
or in the Roman catacombs, which are still preserved
to attest the undying fortitude of the martyrs
and the enormity of their sufferings.
</p>

<p>
And yet Pagan Rome, before whose standard
the mightiest nations quailed, was unable to crush
the infant Church or arrest her progress. In a
short time we find this colossal Empire going to
pieces, and the Head of the Catholic Church dispensing
laws to Christendom in the very city
from which the imperial Cæsars had promulgated
their edicts against Christianity!
</p>

<p>
During the fifth and sixth centuries the Goths
and Vandals, the Huns, Visigoths, Lombards and
other immense tribes of Barbarians came down
like a torrent from the North, invading the fairest
portions of Southern Europe. They dismembered
the Roman Empire and swept away nearly
every trace of the old Roman civilization. They
<pb n="053"/><anchor id="Pg053"/>
plundered cities, leveled churches and left ruin
and desolation after them. Yet, though conquering
for awhile, they were conquered in turn by
submitting to the sweet yoke of the Gospel. And
thus, as even the infidel Gibbon observes, <q>The
progress of Christianity has been marked by two
glorious and decisive victories over the learned
and luxurious citizens of the Roman Empire and
over the warlike Barbarians of Scythia and Germany,
who subverted the empire and embraced
the religion of the Romans.</q><note place='foot'>Decline
and Fall of the Roman Empire, ch. xxxvii, p. 450.</note>
</p>

<p>
Mohamedanism took its rise in the seventh
century in Arabia, and made rapid conquests in
Asia. In the fifteenth century Constantinople was
captured by the followers of the false prophet, who
even threatened to subject all Europe to their
sway. For nine centuries Mohamedanism continued
to be a standing menace to christendom, till
the final issue came when it was to be decided once
for all whether Christianity and civilization on the
one hand, or Mohamedanism and infidelity on the
other, should rule the destinies of Europe and the
world.
</p>

<p>
At the earnest solicitation of the Pope, the kingdom
of Spain and the republic of Venice formed
an offensive league against the Turks, who were
signally defeated in the battle of Lepanto, in 1571.
And if the Cross, instead of the Crescent, surmounts
the cities of Europe today, it is indebted
for this priceless blessing to the vigilance of the
Roman Pontiffs.
</p>

<p>
Another adversary more formidable and dangerous
than those I have mentioned threatened the
overthrow of the Church in the fourth and fifth
centuries. I speak of the great heresy of Arius,
which was followed by those of Nestorius and
Eutyches.
</p>

<pb n="054"/><anchor id="Pg054"/>

<p>
The Arian schism, soon after its rise, spread
rapidly through Europe, Northern Africa and
portions of Asia. It received the support of immense
multitudes, and flourished for awhile under
the fostering care of several successive emperors.
Catholic Bishops were banished from
their sees, and their places were filled by Arian
intruders. The Church which survived the sword
of Paganism seemed for awhile to yield to the
poison of Arianism. But after a short career of
prosperity this gigantic sect became weakened by
intestine divisions, and was finally swept away
by other errors which came following in its footsteps.
</p>

<p>
You are already familiar with the great religious
revolution of the sixteenth century, which
spread like a tornado over Northern Europe and
threatened, if that were possible, to engulf the
bark of Peter. More than half of Germany followed
the new Gospel of Martin Luther. Switzerland
submitted to the doctrines of Zuinglius. The
faith was lost in Sweden through the influence of
its king, Gustavus Vasa. Denmark conformed to
the new creed through the intrigues of King
Christian II. Catholicity was also crushed out
in Norway, England and Scotland. Calvinism in
the sixteenth century and Voltaireism in the eighteenth
had gained such a foothold in France that
the faith of that glorious Catholic nation twice
trembled in the balance. Ireland alone, of all the
nations of Northern Europe, remained faithful to
the ancient Church.
</p>

<p>
Let us now calmly survey the field after the din
and smoke of battle have passed away. Let us
examine the condition of the old Church after
having passed through those deadly conflicts. We
see her numerically stronger today than at any
<pb n="055"/><anchor id="Pg055"/>
previous period of her history. The losses she
sustained in the old world are more than compensated
by her acquisitions in the new. She has already
recovered a good portion of the ground
wrested from her in the sixteenth century. She
numbers now about three hundred million adherents.
She exists today not an effete institution,
but in all the integrity and fulness of life, with
her organism unimpaired, more united, more
compact and more vigorous than ever she was
before.
</p>

<p>
The so-called Reformation of the sixteenth century
bears many points of resemblance to the great
Arian heresy. Both schisms originated with
Priests impatient of the yoke of the Gospel, fond
of novelty and ambitious for notoriety. Both were
nursed and sustained by the reigning Powers, and
were augmented by large accessions of proselytes.
Both spread for awhile with the irresistible force
of a violent hurricane, till its fury was spent.
Both subsequently became subdivided into various
bodies. The extinction of Protestantism
would complete the parallel.
</p>

<p>
In this connection a remark of De Maistre is
worth quoting: <q>If Protestantism bears always
the same name, though its belief has been perpetually
shifting, it is because its name is purely
negative and means only the denial of Catholicity,
so that the less it believes, and the more it protests,
the more consistently Protestant it will be.
Since, then, its name becomes continually truer,
it must subsist until it perishes, just as an ulcer
disappears with the last atom of the flesh which
it has been eating away.</q><note place='foot'>Du Pape, 1, 2, c. 5.</note>
</p>

<p>
But similar causes will produce similar results.
As both revolutions were the offspring of rebellion;
<pb n="056"/><anchor id="Pg056"/>
as both have been marked by the same vigorous
youth, the same precocious manhood, the same
premature decay and dismemberment of parts; so
we are not rash in predicting that the dissolution
which long since visited the former is destined,
sooner or later, to overtake the latter. But the
Catholic Church, because she is the work of God,
is always <q>renewing her strength, like the eagle's.</q><note place='foot'>Psalm
cii. 5.</note>
You ask for a miracle, as the Jews asked our Saviour
for a sign. You ask the Church to prove her
divine mission by a miraculous agency. Is not her
very survival the greatest of prodigies? If you
beheld some fair bride with all the weakness of
humanity upon her, cast into a prison and starved
and trampled upon, hacked and tortured, her blood
sprinkled upon her dungeon walls, and if you saw
her again emerging from her prison, in all the
bloom and freshness of youth, and surviving for
years and centuries beyond the span of human life,
continuing to be the joyful mother of children,
would you not call that scene a miracle?
</p>

<p>
And is not this a picture of our Mother, the
Church? Has she not passed through all these
vicissitudes? Has she not tasted the bitterness of
prison in every age? Has not her blood been shed
in every clime?
</p>

<p>
And yet in her latter days, she is as fair as ever,
and the nursing mother of children. Are not civil
governments and institutions mortal as well as
men? Why should the Republic of the Church be
an exception to the law of decay and death? If
this is not a miracle, I know not what a miracle is.
</p>

<p>
If Augustin, that profound Christian philosopher,
could employ this argument in the fifth century,
with how much more force may it be used
today, fifteen hundred years after his time!
</p>

<pb n="057"/><anchor id="Pg057"/>

<p>
But far be it from us to ascribe to any human
cause this marvelous survival of the Church.
</p>

<p>
Her indestructibility is not due, as some suppose,
to her wonderful organization, or to the far-reaching
policy of her Pontiffs, or to the learning and
wisdom of her teachers. If she has survived, it is
not because of human wisdom, but often in spite of
human folly. Her permanence is due not to the
arm of the flesh, but to the finger of God. <q>Not to
us, O Lord, not to us, but to Thy name give glory.</q>
</p>

<p>
I would now ask this question of all that are
hostile to the Catholic Church and that are plotting
her destruction: How can you hope to overturn
an institution which for more than nineteen
centuries has successfully resisted all the combined
assaults of the world, of men, and of the
powers of darkness? What means will you employ
to encompass her ruin?
</p>

<p>
I. Is it the power of Kings, and Emperors,
and Prime Ministers? They have tried in vain
to crush her, from the days of the Roman Cæsars
to those of the former Chancellor of Germany.
</p>

<p>
Many persons labor under the erroneous impression
that the crowned heads of Europe have
been the unvarying supporters of the Church, and
that if their protection were withdrawn she would
soon collapse. So far from the Church being
sheltered behind earthly thrones, her worst enemies
have been, with some honorable exceptions,
so-called Christian Princes who were nominal children
of the Church. They chafed under her salutary
discipline; they wished to be rid of her yoke,
because she alone, in time of oppression, had the
power and the courage to stand by the rights of
the people, and place her breast as a wall of
brass against the encroachments of their rulers.
With calm confidence we can say with the Psalmist:
<pb n="058"/><anchor id="Pg058"/>
<q>Why have the Gentiles raged, and the people
devised vain things? The kings of the earth
stood up, and the princes met together, against
the Lord, and against his Christ. Let us break
their bonds asunder, and let us cast away their
yoke from us.
He that dwelleth in heaven shall laugh at them
and the Lord shall deride them.</q><note place='foot'>Psalm ii. 1-4.</note>
</p>

<p>
II. Can the immense resources and organized
power of rival religious bodies succeed in absorbing
her and in bringing her to naught? I am not
disposed to undervalue this power. Against any
human force it would be irresistible. But if the
colossal strength, and incomparable machinery of
the Roman Empire could not prevent the establishment
of the Church; if Arianism, Nestorianism,
Eutychianism could not check her development,
how can modern organizations stop her
progress now, when in the fulness of her
strength?
</p>

<p>
It is easier to preserve what is created, than
to create anew.
</p>

<p>
III. But we have been told: <q>Take from the
Pope his Temporal power and the Church is
doomed to destruction. This is the secret of her
strength; strip her of this, and, like Samson shorn
of his hair, she will betray all the weakness of
a poor mortal. Then this brilliant luminary will
wax pale and she will sink below the horizon,
never more to rise again.</q>
</p>

<p>
For more than seven centuries after the establishment
of the Church the Popes had no sovereign
territorial jurisdiction. How could she
have outlived that period, if the temporal power
were essential to her perpetuity? And even since
1870 the Pope has been deprived of his temporalities.
<pb n="059"/><anchor id="Pg059"/>
This loss, however, does not bring a wrinkle
on the fair brow of the Church, nor does it retard
one inch her onward march.
</p>

<p>
IV. Is she unable to cope with modern inventions
and the mechanical progress of the nineteenth
century? We are often told so; but far
from hiding our head, like the ostrich in the
sand, at the approach of these inventions we hail
them as messengers of God, and will use them as
Providential instruments for the further propagation
of the faith.
</p>

<p>
If we succeeded so well before, when we had no
ships but frail canoes, no compass but our eyes;
when we had no roads but eternal snows, virgin
forests and trackless deserts; when we had no
guide save faith, and hope, and God&mdash;if even then
we succeeded so well in carrying the Gospel to
the confines of the earth, how much more can we
do now by the aid of telegraph, steamships and
railroads?
</p>

<p>
Yes, O men of genius, we bless your inventions;
we bless you, ye modern discoveries; and we will
impress you into the service of the Church and
say: <q>Fire and heat bless the Lord. Lightnings
and clouds bless the Lord; all ye works of the
Lord bless the Lord; praise and exalt him above
all forever.</q><note place='foot'>Daniel, iii.</note>
</p>

<p>
The utility of modern inventions to the Church
has lately been manifested in a conspicuous manner.
The Pope called a council of all the Bishops
of the world. Without the aid of steam it would
have been almost impossible for them to assemble;
by its aid they were able to meet from the
uttermost bounds of the earth.
</p>

<p>
V. But may not the light of the Church grow
pale and be extinguished before the intellectual
<pb n="060"/><anchor id="Pg060"/>
blaze of the nineteenth century? Has she not
much to fear from literature, the arts and
sciences? She has always been the Patroness
of literature, and the fostering Mother of the
arts and sciences. She founded and endowed
nearly all the great universities of Europe.
</p>

<p>
Not to mention those of the continent, a bare
catalogue of which would cover a large space, I
may allude to the Universities of Oxford and Cambridge,
the two most famous seats of learning in
England, which were established under Catholic
auspices centuries before the Reformation.
</p>

<p>
The Church also founded three of the four universities
now existing in Scotland, viz: St. Andrew's
in 1411, Glasgow in 1450 and Aberdeen in
1494.
</p>

<p>
Without her we should be deprived to-day of
the priceless treasures of ancient literature; for,
in preserving the languages of Greece and Rome
from destruction, she rescued classical writers of
those countries from oblivion. Hallam justly observes
that, were it not for the diligent labors
of the monks in the Middle Ages, our knowledge
of the history of ancient Greece and Rome would
be as vague today as our information regarding
the Pyramids of Egypt.
</p>

<p>
And as for works of art, there are more valuable
monuments of art contained in the single
museum of the Vatican than are to be found in
all our country. Artists are obliged to go to
Rome to consult their best models. Our churches
are not only temples of worship, but depositories
of sacred art. For our intellectual progress we
are in no small measure indebted to the much-abused
Middle Ages. Tyndall has the candor to
observe that <q>The nineteenth century strikes its
roots into the centuries gone by and draws nutriment
from them.</q><note place='foot'>Tyndall, Study of Physics.</note>
</p>

<pb n="061"/><anchor id="Pg061"/>

<p>
VI. Is it liberty that will destroy the Church?
The Church breathes freely and expands with
giant growth, where true liberty is found. She is
always cramped in her operations wherever despotism
casts its dark shadow. Nowhere does she
enjoy more independence than here; nowhere is
she more vigorous and more prosperous.
</p>

<p>
Children of the Church, fear nothing, happen
what will to her. Christ is with her and therefore
she cannot sink. Cæsar, in crossing the Adriatic,
said to the troubled oarsman: <q>Quid times?
Cæsarem vehis.</q> What Cæsar said in presumption
Jesus says with truth: What fearest thou?
Christ is in the ship. Are we not positive that
the sun will rise tomorrow and next day, and so
on to the end of the world? Why? Because God
so ordained when He established it in the heavens;
and because it has never failed to run its
course from the beginning. Has not Christ promised
that the Church should always enlighten the
world? Has He not, so far, fulfilled His promise
concerning His Church? Has she not gone steadily
on her course amid storm and sunshine? The
fulfilment of the past is the best security for the
future.
</p>

<p>
Amid the continual changes in human institutions
she is the one Institution that never changes.
Amid the universal ruins of earthly monuments
she is the one monument that stands proudly pre-eminent.
Not a stone in this building falls to the
ground. Amid the general destruction of kingdoms
her kingdom is never destroyed. Ever ancient
and ever new, time writes no wrinkles on
her Divine brow.
</p>

<p>
The Church has seen the birth of every government
of Europe, and it is not at all improbable
that she shall also witness the death of them all
<pb n="062"/><anchor id="Pg062"/>
and chant their requiem. She was more than fourteen
hundred years old when Columbus discovered
our continent, and the foundation of our Republic
is but as yesterday to her.
</p>

<p>
She calmly looked on while the Goths and the
Visigoths, the Huns and the Saxons swept like a
torrent over Europe, subverting dynasties. She
has seen monarchies changed into republics, and
republics consolidated into empires&mdash;all this has
she witnessed, while her own Divine Constitution
has remained unaltered. Of Her we can truly
say in the words of the Psalmist: <q>They shall
perish, but thou remainest; and all of them shall
grow old as a garment. And as a vesture Thou
shalt change them, and they shall be changed. But
thou art always the self-same, and thy years shalt
not fail. The children of thy servants shall continue,
and their seed shall be directed forever.</q><note place='foot'>Psalm ci. 27-29.</note>
God forbid that we should ascribe to any human
cause this marvellous survival of the Church.
Her indestructibility is not due, as some suppose,
to her wonderful organization, or to the far-reaching
policy of her Pontiffs, or to the learning and
wisdom of her teachers. If she has survived, it
is not because of human wisdom, but often in
spite of human folly. Her permanence is due not
to the arm of the flesh, but to the finger of God.
</p>

<p>
In the brightest days of the Republic of Pagan
Rome the Roman said with pride: <q>I am a
Roman citizen.</q> This was his noblest title. He
was proud of the Republic, because it was venerable
in years, powerful in the number of its citizens,
and distinguished for the wisdom of its
statesmen. What a subject of greater glory to be
a citizen of the Republic of the Church which has
lasted for nineteen centuries, and will continue
<pb n="063"/><anchor id="Pg063"/>
till time shall be no more; which counts her millions
of children in every clime; which numbers
her heroes and her martyrs by the thousand;
which associates you with the Apostles and
Saints. <q>You are no more strangers and foreigners,
but you are fellow-citizens with the Saints
and the domestics of God, built upon the foundation
of the Prophets and Apostles, Jesus Christ
Himself being the chief cornerstone.</q><note place='foot'>Eph. ii. 19, 20.</note>
Though separated from earthly relatives and parents,
you need never be separated from her. She is
ever with us to comfort us. She says to us what
her Divine Spouse said to His Apostles: <q>Behold,
I am with you all days, even to the consummation
of the world.</q><note place='foot'>Matt. xxviii. 20.</note>
</p>

</div>

<pb n="065"/><anchor id="Pg065"/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc' level1='Chapter VII. Infallible Authority Of The Church.'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='Chapter VII.'/>
<head type='sub'>Chapter VII.</head>
<head>Infallible Authority Of The Church.</head>

<p>
The Church has authority from God to teach
regarding faith and morals, and in her teaching
she is preserved from error by the special
guidance of the Holy Ghost.
</p>

<p>
The prerogative of infallibility is clearly deduced
from the attributes of the Church already
mentioned. The Church is One, Holy, Catholic,
and Apostolic. Preaching the same creed everywhere
and at all times; teaching holiness and
truth, she is, of course, essentially unerring in
her doctrine; for what is one, holy or unchangeable
must be infallibly true.
</p>

<p>
That the Church was infallible in the Apostolic
age is denied by no Christian. We never question
the truth of the Apostles' declarations;<note place='foot'>See Gal.
iv. 14; 1 Thess. ii. 13.</note> they
were, in fact, the only authority in the Church
for the first century. The New Testament was
not completed till the close of the first century.
There is no just ground for denying to the Apostolic
teachers of the nineteenth century in which
we live a prerogative clearly possessed by those
of the first, especially as the Divine Word nowhere
intimates that this unerring guidance was
to die with the Apostles. On the contrary, as
the Apostles transmitted to their successors their
power to preach, to baptize, to ordain, to confirm,
<pb n="066"/><anchor id="Pg066"/>
etc., they must also have handed down to them
the no less essential gift of infallibility.
</p>

<p>
God loves us as much as He loved the primitive
Christians; Christ died for us as well as for them
and we have as much need of unerring teachers
as they had.
</p>

<p>
It will not suffice to tell me: <q>We have an infallible
Scripture as a substitute for an infallible
apostolate of the first century,</q> for an infallible
book is of no use to me without an infallible interpreter,
as the history of Protestantism too
clearly demonstrates.
</p>

<p>
But besides these presumptive arguments, we
have positive evidence from Scripture that the
Church cannot err in her teachings. Our blessed
Lord, in constituting St. Peter Prince of His
Apostles, says to him: <q>Thou art Peter, and upon
this rock I will build My Church, and the gates
of hell shall not prevail against it.</q><note place='foot'>Matt. xvi. 18.</note>
Christ makes here a solemn prediction that no error
shall ever invade His Church, and if she fell into
error the gates of hell have certainly prevailed
against her.
</p>

<p>
The Reformers of the sixteenth century affirm
that the Church did fall into error; that the gates
of hell did prevail against her; that from the
sixth to the sixteenth century she was a sink of
iniquity. The Book of Homilies of the Church of
England says that the Church <q>lay buried in
damnable idolatry for eight hundred years or
more.</q> The personal veracity of our Savior and
of the Reformers is here at issue, for our Lord
makes a statement which they contradict. Who
is to be believed, Jesus or the Reformers?
</p>

<p>
If the prediction of our Savior about the preservation
of His Church from error be false, then
<pb n="067"/><anchor id="Pg067"/>
Jesus Christ is not God, since God cannot lie.
He is not even a prophet, since He predicted
falsehood. Nay, He is an impostor, and all Christianity
is a miserable failure and a huge deception,
since it rests on a false Prophet.
</p>

<p>
But if Jesus predicted the truth when He declared
that the gates of hell should not prevail
against His Church&mdash;and who dare deny it?&mdash;then
the Church never has and never could have
fallen from the truth; then the Catholic Church
is infallible, for she alone claims that prerogative,
and she is the only Church that is acknowledged
to have existed from the beginning. Truly is
Jesus that wise Architect mentioned in the Gospel,
<q>who built his house upon a rock; and the
rain fell, and the floods came, and the winds blew,
and they beat upon that house, and it fell not,
for it was founded upon a rock.</q><note place='foot'>Matt. vii. 24, et seq.</note>
</p>

<p>
Jesus sends forth the Apostles with plenipotentiary
powers to preach the Gospel. <q>As the
Father,</q> He says, <q>hath sent Me, I also send
you.</q><note place='foot'>John xx. 21.</note> <q>Going therefore, teach all nations,
teaching them to observe all things whatsoever
I have commanded you.</q><note place='foot'>Matt. xxviii. 19, 20.</note>
<q>Preach the Gospel to every creature.</q><note place='foot'>Mark xvi. 15.</note>
<q>Ye shall be witnesses unto
Me in Jerusalem, and in all Judea, and Samaria,
and even to the uttermost part of the earth.</q><note place='foot'>Acts i. 8.</note>
</p>

<p>
This commission evidently applies not to the
Apostles only, but also to their successors, to
the end of time, since it was utterly impossible
for the Apostles personally to preach to the whole
world.
</p>

<p>
Not only does our Lord empower His Apostles
to preach the Gospel, but He commands, and under
the most severe penalties, those to whom they
<pb n="068"/><anchor id="Pg068"/>
preach to listen and obey. <q>Whosoever will not
receive you, nor hear your words, going forth
from that house or city, shake the dust from your
feet. Amen, I say to you, it shall be more tolerable
for the land of Sodom and Gomorrha in the
day of judgment than for that city.</q><note place='foot'>Matt.
x. 14, 15.</note> <q>If he
will not hear the Church, let him be to thee as the
heathen and the publican.</q><note place='foot'>Matt.
xviii. 17.</note> <q>He that believeth
shall be saved; he that believeth not shall be condemned.</q><note place='foot'>Mark
xvi. 16.</note>
<q>He that heareth you heareth Me;
he that despiseth you despiseth Me; and he that
despiseth Me despiseth Him that sent Me.</q><note place='foot'>Luke x. 16.</note>
</p>

<p>
From these passages we see, on the one hand,
that the Apostles and their successors have received
full powers to announce the Gospel; and
on the other, that their hearers are obliged to
listen with docility and to obey not merely by
an external compliance, but also by an internal
assent of the intellect. If, therefore, the Catholic
Church could preach error, would not God Himself
be responsible for the error? And could not
the faithful soul say to God with all reverence
and truth: Thou hast commanded me, O Lord,
to hear Thy Church; if I am deceived by obeying
her, Thou art the cause of my error?
</p>

<p>
But we may rest assured that an all-wise Providence
who commands His Church to speak in
His name will so guide her in the path of truth
that she shall never lead into error those that
follow her teachings.
</p>

<p>
But as this privilege of Infallibility was a very
extraordinary favor, our Savior confers it on the
rulers of His Church in language which removes
all doubt from the sincere inquirer, and under
circumstances which add to the majesty of His
<pb n="069"/><anchor id="Pg069"/>
word. Shortly before His death Jesus consoles
His disciples by this promise: <q>I will ask the
Father, and He shall give you another Paraclete,
<emph>that He may abide with you forever</emph>.... But
when He, the Spirit of truth, shall come, <emph>He will
teach you all truth</emph>.</q><note place='foot'>John xiv. 16; xvi. 13.</note>
</p>

<p>
The following text of the same import forms the
concluding words recorded of our Savior in St.
Matthew's Gospel: <q>All power is given to Me in
heaven and on earth. Go ye, therefore, and teach
all nations, ... teaching them to observe all
things whatsoever I have commanded you. And
behold I am with you all days, even to the consummation
of the world.</q><note place='foot'>Matt. xxviii. 18-20.</note>
</p>

<p>
He begins by asserting His own Divine authority
and mission. <q>All power is given,</q> etc. That
power He then delegates to His Apostles and to
their successors: <q>Go ye, therefore, and teach all
nations,</q> etc. He does not instruct them to scatter
Bibles broadcast over the earth, but to teach
by word of mouth. <q>And behold!</q> Our Savior
never arrests the attention of His hearers by
using the interjection, <hi rend='italic'>behold</hi>, unless when He has
something unusually solemn and extraordinary
to communicate. An important announcement is
sure to follow this word. <q>Behold, I am with
you.</q> These words, <q><hi rend='italic'>I am with you</hi>,</q> are frequently
addressed in Sacred Scripture by the Almighty
to His Prophets and Patriarchs, and they
always imply a special presence and a particular
supervision of the Deity.<note place='foot'>Ex. iii.
12; Jer. xv. 20, etc.</note> They convey the same
meaning in the present instance. Christ says
equivalently I who <q>am the way, the truth and
the life,</q> will protect you from error and will
guide you in your speech. I will be with you,
<pb n="070"/><anchor id="Pg070"/>
not merely during <emph>your</emph> natural lives, not for a
century only, but all days, at all times, without
intermission, even to the end of the world.
</p>

<p>
These words of Jesus Christ establish two important
facts: First&mdash;A promise to guard His
Church from error. Second&mdash;A promise that His
presence with the Church will be continuous, without
any interval of absence, to the consummation
of the world.
</p>

<p>
And this is also the sentiment of the Apostle of
the Gentiles writing to the Ephesians: God <q>gave
some indeed Apostles, and some Prophets, and
some Evangelists, and others Pastors and Teachers,
for the perfecting of the Saints, for the work
of the ministry, for the building up of the body
of Christ, until we all meet in the unity of faith, ...
that we may no more be children, tossed to
and fro, and carried about with every wind of
doctrine, by the wickedness of men, in craft, by
which they lie in wait to deceive.</q><note place='foot'>Eph. iv. 11-14.</note>
</p>

<p>
Notwithstanding these plain declarations of
Scripture, some persons think it an unwarrantable
assumption for the Church to claim infallibility.
But mark the consequences that follow
from denying it.
</p>

<p>
If your church is not infallible it is liable to
err, for there is no medium between infallibility
and liability to error. If your church and her
ministers are fallible in their doctrinal teachings,
as they admit, they may be preaching falsehood
to you, instead of truth. If so, you are in doubt
whether you are listening to truth or falsehood.
If you are in doubt you can have no faith, for
faith excludes doubt, and in that state you displease
God, for <q>without faith it is impossible
to please God.</q><note place='foot'>Heb. xi. 6.</note>
Faith and infallibility must go
<pb n="071"/><anchor id="Pg071"/>
hand in hand. The one cannot exist without the
other. There can be no faith in the hearer unless
there is unerring authority in the speaker&mdash;an authority
founded upon such certain knowledge as
precludes the possibility of falling into error on his
part, and including such unquestioned veracity as
to prevent his deceiving him who accepts his word.
</p>

<p>
You admit infallible certainty in the physical
sciences; why should you deny it in the science of
salvation? The astronomer can predict with accuracy
a hundred years beforehand an eclipse of the
sun or moon. He can tell what point in the heavens
a planet will reach on a given day. The mariner,
guided by his compass, knows, amid the raging
storm and the darkness of the night, that he is
steering his course directly to the city of his destination;
and is not an infallible guide as necessary
to conduct you to the city of God in heaven? Is it
not, moreover, a blessing and a consolation that,
amid the ever-changing views of men, amid the
conflict of human opinion and the tumultuous
waves of human passion, there is one voice heard
above the din and uproar, crying in clear, unerring
tones: <q>Thus saith the Lord?</q>
</p>

<p>
It is very strange that the Catholic Church must
apologize to the world for simply declaring that
she speaks the truth, the whole truth, and nothing
but the truth.
</p>

<p>
The Roman Pantheon was dedicated to all the
gods of the Empire, and their name was legion.
Formidable also in numbers are the Founders of
the religious sects existing in our country. A
Pantheon as vast as Westminster Abbey would
hardly be spacious enough to contain life-sized
statues for their accommodation.
</p>

<p>
If you were to confront those figures, and to ask
them, one by one, to give an account of the faith
<pb n="072"/><anchor id="Pg072"/>
they had professed, and if they were endowed with
the gift of speech, you would find that no two of
them were in entire accord, but that they all differed
among themselves on some fundamental principle
of revelation.
</p>

<p>
Would you not be acting very unwisely and be
hazarding your soul's salvation in submitting to
the teachings of so many discordant and conflicting
oracles.
</p>

<p>
Children of the Catholic Church, give thanks to
God that you are members of that Communion,
which proclaims year after year the one same and
unalterable message of truth, peace and love, and
that you are preserved from all errors in faith,
and from all illusion in the practice of virtue. You
are happily strangers to those interior conflicts, to
those perplexing doubts and to that frightful uncertainty
which distracts the souls of those whose
private judgment is their only guide, who are
<q>ever learning and never attaining to the knowledge
of the truth.</q><note place='foot'>Tim. iii.
7.</note> You are not, like others,
drifting helplessly over the ocean of uncertainty
and <q>carried about by every wind of doctrine.</q>
You are not as <q>blind men led by blind guides.</q>
You are not like those who are in the midst of a
spiritual desert intersected by various by-paths,
not knowing which to pursue; but you are on that
high road spoken of by the prophet Isaiah, which is
so <q>straight a way that fools shall not err therein.</q><note place='foot'>Isaiah
xxxv. 8.</note>
You are a part of that universal Communion
which has no <q>High Church</q> and <q>Low
Church;</q> no <q>New School</q> and <q>Old School,</q>
for you all belong to that School which is <q>ever
ancient and ever new.</q> You enjoy that profound
peace and tranquillity which springs from the conscious
<pb n="073"/><anchor id="Pg073"/>
possession of the whole truth. Well may
you exclaim: <q>Behold how good and how pleasant
it is for brethren to dwell together in unity.</q><note place='foot'>Ps. cxxxii.</note>
</p>

<p>
Give thanks, moreover, to God that you belong
to a Church which has also a keen sense to detect
and expose those moral shams, those pious frauds,
those socialistic schemes which are so often undertaken
in this country ostensibly in the name of religion
and morality, but which, in reality, are subversive
of morality and order, which are the offspring
of fanaticism, and serve as a mask to hide
the most debasing passions. Neither Mormons
nor Millerites, nor the advocates of free love or of
women's rights, so called, find any recruits in the
Catholic Church. She will never suffer her children
to be ensnared by these impostures, how specious
soever they may be.
</p>

<p>
From what has been said in the preceding pages,
it follows that the Catholic Church cannot be reformed.
I do not mean, of course, that the Pastors
of the Church are personally impeccable or
not subject to sin. Every teacher in the Church,
from the Pope down to the humblest Priest, is liable
at any moment, like any of the faithful, to
fall from grace and to stand in need of moral
reformation. We all carry <q>this treasure (of innocence)
in earthen vessels.</q>
</p>

<p>
My meaning is that the Church is not susceptible
of being reformed in her doctrines. The
Church is the work of an Incarnate God. Like all
God's works, it is perfect. It is, therefore, incapable
of reform. Is it not the height of presumption
for men to attempt to improve upon the
work of God? Is it not ridiculous for the Luthers,
the Calvins, the Knoxes and the Henries
<pb n="074"/><anchor id="Pg074"/>
and a thousand lesser lights to be offering their
amendments to the Constitution of the Church, as
if it were a human Institution?
</p>

<p>
Our Lord Himself has never ceased to rule personally
over His Church. It is time enough for
little men to take charge of the Ship when the
great Captain abandons the helm.
</p>

<p>
A Protestant gentleman of very liberal education
remarked to me, before the opening of the
late Ecumenical Council: <q>I am assured, sir,
by a friend, in confidence, that, at a secret Conclave
of Bishops recently held in Rome it was
resolved that the Dogma of the Immaculate Conception
would be reconsidered and abolished at
the approaching General Council; in fact, that
the definition was a mistake, and that the blunder
of 1854 would be repaired in 1869.</q> I told him,
of course, that no such question could be entertained
in the Council; that the doctrinal decrees
of the Church were irrevocable, and that the
dogma of the Immaculate Conception was defined
once and forever.
</p>

<p>
If only one instance could be given in which
the Church ceased to teach a doctrine of faith
which had been previously held, that single instance
would be the death blow of her claim to infallibility.
But it is a marvelous fact worthy
of record that in the whole history of the Church,
from the nineteenth century to the first, no solitary
example can be adduced to show that any
Pope or General Council ever revoked a decree
of faith or morals enacted by any preceding Pontiff
or Council. Her record in the past ought to
be a sufficient warrant that she will tolerate no
doctrinal variations in the future.
</p>

<pb n="075"/><anchor id="Pg075"/>

<p>
If, as we have seen, the Church has authority
from God to teach, and if she teaches nothing
but the truth, is it not the duty of all Christians
to hear her voice and obey her commands? She
is the organ of the Holy Ghost. She is the Representative
of Jesus Christ, who has said to her:
<q>He that heareth you heareth Me; he that despiseth
you despiseth Me.</q> She is the Mistress
of truth. It is the property of the human mind
to embrace truth wherever it finds it. It would,
therefore, be not only an act of irreverence, but
of sheer folly, to disobey the voice of this ever-truthful
Mother.
</p>

<p>
If a citizen is bound to obey the laws of his
country, though these laws may not in all respects
be conformable to strict justice; if a child
is bound by natural and divine law to obey his
mother, though she may sometimes err in her
judgments, how much more strictly are not we
obliged to be docile to the teachings of the Catholic
Church, our Mother, whose admonitions are
always just, whose precepts are immutable!
</p>

<p>
<q>For twenty years,</q> observed a recently converted
Minister of the Protestant Church, <q>I
fought and struggled against the Church with
all the energy of my will. But when I became
a Catholic all my doubts ended, my inquiries
ceased. I became as a little child, and rushed
like a lisping babe into the arms of my mother.</q>
By Baptism Christians become children of the
Church, no matter who pours upon them the regenerating
waters. If she is our Mother, where
is our love and obedience? When the infant seeks
nourishment at its mother's breast it does not
analyze its food. When it receives instructions
from its mother's lips it never doubts, but instinctively
believes. When the mother stretches
<pb n="076"/><anchor id="Pg076"/>
forth her hand the child follows unhesitatingly.
The Christian should have for his spiritual
Mother all the simplicity, all the credulity, I
might say, of a child, guided by the instincts of
faith. <q>Unless ye become,</q> says our Lord, <q>as
little children, ye shall not enter into the Kingdom
of Heaven.</q><note place='foot'>Matt. xviii. 3.</note>
<q>As new-born babes, desire
the rational milk without guile; that thereby you
may grow unto salvation.</q><note place='foot'>Pet. ii.
2.</note> In her nourishment
there is no poison; in her doctrines there is no
guile.
</p>

</div>

<pb n="077"/><anchor id="Pg077"/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc' level1='Chapter VIII. The Church And The Bible.'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='Chapter VIII.'/>
<head type='sub'>Chapter VIII.</head>
<head>The Church And The Bible.</head>

<p>
The Church, as we have just seen, is the
only Divinely constituted teacher of Revelation.
</p>

<p>
Now, the Scripture is the great depository of
the Word of God. Therefore, the Church is the
divinely appointed Custodian and Interpreter of
the Bible. For, her office of infallible Guide were
superfluous if each individual could interpret the
Bible for himself.
</p>

<p>
That God never intended the Bible to be the
Christian's rule of faith, independently of the
living authority of the Church, will be the subject
of this chapter.
</p>

<p>
No nation ever had a greater veneration for
the Bible than the Jewish people. The Holy
Scripture was their pride and their glory. It
was their national song in time of peace; it was
their meditation and solace in time of tribulation
and exile. And yet the Jews never dreamed of
settling their religious controversies by a private
appeal to the Word of God.
</p>

<p>
Whenever any religious dispute arose among
the people it was decided by the High Priest and
the Sanhedrim, which was a council consisting
of seventy-two civil and ecclesiastical judges.
The sentence of the High Priest and of his associate
judges was to be obeyed under penalty of
<pb n="078"/><anchor id="Pg078"/>
death. <q>If thou perceive,</q> says the Book of
Deuteronomy, <q>that there be among you a hard
and doubtful matter in judgment, ... thou shalt
come to the Priests of the Levitical race and to
the judge, ... and they shall show thee the truth
of the judgment.... And thou shalt follow their
sentence; neither shalt thou decline to the right
hand, nor to the left.... But he that will ...
refuse to obey the commandment of the Priest, ...
that man shall die, and thou shalt take away
the evil from Israel.</q><note place='foot'>Deut. xvii. 8, et seq.</note>
</p>

<p>
From this clear sentence you perceive that God
does not refer the Jews for the settlement of their
controversies to the letter of the law, but to the
living authority of the ecclesiastical tribunal
which He had expressly established for that purpose.
</p>

<p>
Hence, the Priests were required to be intimately
acquainted with the Sacred Scripture, because
they were the depositaries of God's law,
and were its expounders to the people. <q>The
lips of the Priest shall keep knowledge, and they
(the people) shall seek the law at his mouth, because
he is the angel (or messenger) of the Lord
of hosts.</q><note place='foot'>Mal. ii. 7.</note>
</p>

<p>
And, in fact, very few of the children of Israel,
except the Priests, were in possession of the Divine
Books. The holy manuscript was rare and
precious. And what provision did God make that
all the people might have an opportunity of hearing
the Scriptures? Did He command the sacred
volume to be multiplied? No; but He ordered
the <emph>Priests</emph> and the <emph>Levites</emph> to be distributed
through the different tribes, that they might always
be at hand to instruct the people in the
knowledge of the law. The Jews were even forbidden
<pb n="079"/><anchor id="Pg079"/>
to read certain portions of the Scripture
till they had reached the age of thirty years.
</p>

<p>
Does our Savior reverse this state of things
when He comes on earth? Does He tell the Jews
to be their own guides in the study of the Scriptures?
By no means; but He commands them to
obey their constituted teachers, no matter how
disedifying might be their private lives. <q>Then
said Jesus to the multitudes and to His disciples:
The Scribes and Pharisees sit upon the chair of
Moses. All things therefore whatsoever they
shall say to you, observe and do.</q><note place='foot'>Matt. xxiii. 2, 3.</note>
</p>

<p>
It is true our Lord said on one occasion
<q>Search the Scriptures, for you <emph>think</emph> in them to
have life everlasting, and the same are they that
give testimony to Me.</q><note place='foot'>John v.
39.</note> This passage is triumphantly
quoted as an argument in favor of private
interpretation. But it proves nothing of the kind.
Many learned commentators, ancient and modern,
express the verb in the indicative mood: <q>Ye
search the Scriptures.</q> At all events, our Savior
speaks here only of the Old Testament because
the New Testament was not yet written.
He addresses not the multitude, but the Pharisees,
who were the teachers of the law, and reproaches
them for not admitting His Divinity. <q>You
have,</q> He says, <q>the Scriptures in your hands;
why then do you not recognize Me as the Messiah,
since they give testimony that I am the Son of
God?</q> He refers them to the Scriptures for a
proof of His Divinity, not as to a source from
which they were to derive all knowledge in regard
to the truths of revelation.
</p>

<p>
Besides, He did not rest the proof of His Divinity
upon the <emph>sole</emph> testimony of Scripture. For
He showed it
<pb n="080"/><anchor id="Pg080"/>
First&mdash;By the testimony of John the Baptist
(v. 33), who had said, <q>Behold the Lamb of God;
behold Him who taketh away the sins of the
world.</q> See also John i. 34.
</p>

<p>
Second&mdash;By the miracles which He wrought
(v. 36).
</p>

<p>
Third&mdash;By the testimony of the Father (v. 37),
when He said: <q>This is my beloved Son, in whom
I am well pleased; hear ye Him.</q> Matt. iii. 16;
Luke ix. 35.
</p>

<p>
Fourth&mdash;By the Scriptures of the Old Testament;
as if He were to say, <q>If you are unwilling
to receive these three proofs, though they are
most cogent, at least you cannot reject the testimony
of the Scriptures, of which you boast so
much.</q>
</p>

<p>
Finally, in this very passage our Lord is explaining
the sense of Holy Writ; therefore, its
true meaning is not left to the private interpretation
of every chance reader. It is, therefore, a
grave perversion of the sacred text to adduce
these words in vindication of private interpretation
of the Scriptures.
</p>

<p>
But when our Redeemer abolished the Old Law
and established His Church, did He intend that
His Gospel should be disseminated by the circulation
of the Bible, or by the living voice of His
disciples? This is a vital question. I answer
most emphatically, that it was by preaching alone
that He intended to convert the nations, and by
preaching alone they were converted. No nation
has ever yet been converted by the agency of
Bible Associations.
</p>

<p>
Jesus Himself never wrote a line of Scripture.
He never once commanded His Apostles to write
a word,<note place='foot'>Except when He directed St. John to write the
Apocalypse, i. 11.</note> or even to circulate the Scriptures already
<pb n="081"/><anchor id="Pg081"/>
existing. When He sends them on their
Apostolic errand, He says: <q>Go <emph>teach</emph> all
nations.</q><note place='foot'>Matt. xxviii. 19.</note>
<q><emph>Preach</emph> the Gospel to every creature.</q><note place='foot'>Mark
xvi. 15.</note>
<q>He that heareth you heareth Me.</q><note place='foot'>Luke x. 16.</note>
And we find the Apostles acting in strict accordance
with these instructions.
</p>

<p>
Of the twelve Apostles, the seventy-two disciples,
and early followers of our Lord only eight
have left us any of their sacred writings. And the
Gospels and Epistles were addressed to particular
persons or particular churches. They were written
on the occasion of some emergency, just as
Bishops issue Pastoral letters to correct abuses
which may spring up in the Church, or to lay
down some rules of conduct for the faithful. The
Apostles are never reported to have circulated a
single volume of the Holy Scripture, but <q>they
going forth, <emph>preached</emph> everywhere, the Lord co-operating
with them.</q><note place='foot'>Mark xvi. 20.</note>
</p>

<p>
Thus we see that in the Old and the New Dispensation
the people were to be guided by a living
authority, and not by their private interpretation
of the Scriptures.
</p>

<p>
Indeed, until the religious revolution of the
sixteenth century, it was a thing unheard of from
the beginning of the world, that people should be
governed by the dead letter of the law either in
civil or ecclesiastical affairs. How are your civil
affairs regulated in this State, for instance? Certainly
not in accordance with your personal interpretation
of the laws of Virginia, but in accordance
with decisions which are rendered by
the constituted judges of the State.
</p>

<p>
Now what the civil code is to the citizen, the
Scripture is to the Christian. The Word of God,
<pb n="082"/><anchor id="Pg082"/>
as well as the civil law, must have an interpreter,
by whose decision we are obliged to abide.
</p>

<p>
We often hear the shibboleth: <q>The Bible, and
the Bible only, must be your guide.</q> Why, then,
do you go to the useless expense of building fine
churches and Sabbath-schools? What is the use
of your preaching sermons and catechizing the
young, if the Bible at home is a sufficient guide
for your people? The fact is, you reverend gentlemen
contradict in practice what you so vehemently
advance in theory. Do not tell me that the
Bible is all-sufficient; or, if you believe it is self-sufficient,
cease your instructions. Stand not between
the people and the Scriptures.
</p>

<p>
I will address myself now in a friendly spirit
to a non-Catholic, and will proceed to show him
that he cannot consistently accept the silent Book
of Scripture as his sufficient guide.
</p>

<p>
A copy of the sacred volume is handed to you
by your minister, who says: <q>Take this book;
you will find it all-sufficient for your salvation.</q>
But here a serious difficulty awaits you at the very
threshold of your investigations. What assurance
have you that the book he hands you is the
<emph>inspired</emph> Word of God; for every part of the Bible
is far from possessing intrinsic evidences of inspiration?
It may, for ought you know, contain
more than the Word of God, or it may not contain
all the Word of God. We must not suppose
that the Bible was always, as it is now, a compact
book, bound in a neat form. It was for several
centuries in scattered fragments, spread over different
parts of Christendom. Meanwhile, many
spurious books, under the name of Scripture, were
circulated among the faithful. There was, for instance,
the spurious Gospel of St. Peter; there
<pb n="083"/><anchor id="Pg083"/>
was also the Gospel of St. James and of St.
Matthias.
</p>

<p>
The Catholic Church, in the plenitude of her
authority, in the third Council of Carthage, (A. D.
397,) separated the chaff from the wheat, and
declared what Books were Canonical, and what
were apocryphal. Even to this day the Christian
sects do not agree among themselves as to what
books are to be accepted as genuine. Some Christians
of continental Europe do not recognize the
Gospels of St. Mark and St. Luke because these
Evangelists were not among the Apostles. Luther
used to call the Epistle of St. James a letter of
straw.
</p>

<p>
But even when you are assured that the Bible
contains the Word of God, and nothing but the
Word of God, how do you know that the translation
is faithful? The Books of Scripture were
originally written in Hebrew and Greek, and you
have only the translation. Before you are certain
that the translation is faithful you must
study the Hebrew and Greek languages, and then
compare the translation with the original. How
few are capable of this gigantic undertaking!
</p>

<p>
Indeed, when you accept the Bible as the Word
of God, you are obliged to receive it on the authority
of the Catholic Church, who was the sole
Guardian of the Scriptures for fifteen hundred
years.
</p>

<p>
But after having ascertained to your satisfaction
that the translation is faithful, still the Scriptures
can never serve as a complete Rule of Faith
and a complete guide to heaven independently of
an authorized, living interpreter.
</p>

<p>
A competent guide, such as our Lord intended
for us, must have three characteristics. It must
be within the reach of everyone; it must be clear
<pb n="084"/><anchor id="Pg084"/>
and intelligible; it must be able to satisfy us on
all questions relating to faith and morals.
</p>

<p>
First&mdash;A complete guide of salvation must be
within the reach of every inquirer after truth;
for, God <q>wishes all men to be saved, and to
come to the knowledge of the truth;</q><note place='foot'>I.
Tim., ii. 4.</note> and therefore
He must have placed within the reach of
everyone the means of arriving at the truth. Now,
it is clear that the Scriptures could not at any
period have been accessible to everyone.
</p>

<p>
They could not have been accessible <emph>to the
primitive Christians</emph>, because they were not all
written for a long time after the establishment
of Christianity. The Christian religion was
founded in the year 33. St. Matthew's Gospel,
the first part of the New Testament ever written,
did not appear till eight years after. The Church
was established about twenty years when St. Luke
wrote his Gospel. And St. John's Gospel did not
come to light till toward the end of the first century.
For many years after the Gospels and
Epistles were written the knowledge of them was
confined to the churches to which they were addressed.
It was not till the close of the fourth
century that the Church framed her Canon of
Scripture and declared the Bible, as we now possess
it, to be the genuine Word of God. And this
was the golden age of Christianity! The most
perfect Christians lived and died and went to
heaven before the most important parts of the
Scriptures were written. And what would have
become of them if the Bible alone had been their
guide?
</p>

<p>
The art of printing was not invented till the
fifteenth century (1440). How utterly impossible it
was to supply everyone with a copy of the Scriptures
<pb n="085"/><anchor id="Pg085"/>
<emph>from the fourth to the fifteenth century</emph>!
During that long period Bibles had to be copied
with the pen. There were but a few hundred of them
in the Christian world, and these were in the hands
of the clergy and the learned. <q>According to the
Protestant system, the art of printing would have
been much more necessary to the Apostles than
the gift of tongues. It was well for Luther that
he did not come into the world until a century
after the immortal invention of Guttenberg. A
hundred years earlier his idea of directing two
hundred and fifty million men to read the
Bible would have been received with shouts of
laughter, and would inevitably have caused his
removal from the pulpit of Wittenberg to a hospital
for the insane.</q><note place='foot'>Martinet,
Religion in Society, Vol. II., c. 10.</note>
</p>

<p>
And even <emph>at the present day</emph>, with all the aid of
steam printing presses, with all the Bible Associations
extending through this country and England,
and supported at enormous expense, it taxes
all their energies to supply every missionary country
with Bibles printed in the languages of the
tribes and peoples for whom they are intended.
</p>

<p>
But even if the Bible were at all times accessible
to everyone, how many millions exist in every
age and country, not excepting our own age of
boasted enlightenment, who are not accessible to
the Bible because they are incapable of reading
the Word of God! Hence, the doctrine of private
interpretation would render many men's salvation
not only difficult, but impossible.
</p>

<p>
Second&mdash;A competent religious guide must be
clear and intelligible to all, so that everyone may
fully understand the true meaning of the instructions
it contains. Is the Bible a book intelligible
to all? Far from it; it is full of obscurities and
<pb n="086"/><anchor id="Pg086"/>
difficulties not only for the illiterate, but even for
the learned. St. Peter himself informs us that
in the Epistles of St. Paul there are <q>certain
things hard to be understood, which the unlearned
and the unstable wrest, as they do also the other
Scriptures, to their own destruction.</q><note place='foot'>II.
Pet., iii. 16.</note> And
consequently he tells us elsewhere <q>that no
prophecy of Scripture is made by private interpretation.</q><note place='foot'>Ibid.,
i. 20.</note>
</p>

<p>
We read in the Acts of the Apostles that a certain
man was riding in his chariot, reading the
Book of Isaiah, and being asked by St. Philip
whether he understood the meaning of the prophecy
he replied: <q>How can I understand unless
some man show me?</q><note place='foot'>Acts, viii.
31.</note> admitting, by these modest
words, that he did not pretend of himself to
interpret the Scriptures.
</p>

<p>
The Fathers of the Church, though many of
them spent their whole lives in the study of the
Scriptures, are unanimous in pronouncing the
Bible a book full of knotty difficulties. And yet
we find in our days pedants, with a mere smattering
of Biblical knowledge, who see no obscurity
at all in the Word of God, and who presume to
expound it from Genesis to Revelation. <q>Fools
rush in where angels fear to tread.</q>
</p>

<p>
Does not the conduct of the Reformers conclusively
show the utter folly of interpreting the
Scriptures by private judgment? As soon as they
rejected the oracle of the Church, and set up their
own private judgment as the highest standard of
authority, they could hardly agree among themselves
on the meaning of a single important text.
The Bible became in their hands a complete Babel.
The sons of Noe attempted in their pride to ascend
to heaven by building the tower of Babel,
<pb n="087"/><anchor id="Pg087"/>
and their scheme ended in the confusion and multiplication
of tongues. The children of the Reformation
endeavored in their conceit to lead men
to heaven by the private interpretation of the
Bible, and their efforts led to the confusion and
the multiplication of religions. Let me give you
one example out of a thousand. These words of
the Gospel, <q>This is My Body,</q> were understood
only in one sense before the Reformation. The
new lights of the sixteenth century gave no fewer
than eighty different meanings to these four simple
words, and since their time the number of interpretations
has increased to over a hundred.
</p>

<p>
No one will deny that in our days there exists
a vast multitude of sects, which are daily multiplying.
No one will deny<note place='foot'>Except, perhaps,
Rev. H. W. Beecher. who thinks that God
is glorified by the variety of sects.</note> that this multiplying
of creeds is a crying scandal, and a great stumbling-block
in the way of the conversion of heathen
nations. No one can deny that these divisions
in the Christian family are traceable to the assumption
of the right of private judgment. Every
new-fledged divine, with a superficial education,
imagines that he has received a call from heaven
to inaugurate a new religion, and he is ambitious
of handing down his fame to posterity by stamping
his name on a new sect. And every one of
these champions of modern creeds appeals to the
unchanging Bible in support of his ever-changing
doctrines.
</p>

<p>
Thus, one body of Christians will prove from
the Bible that there is but one Person in God,
while the rest will prove from the same source
that a Trinity of Persons is a clear article of
Divine Revelation. One will prove from the Holy
Book that Jesus Christ is not God. Others will
<pb n="088"/><anchor id="Pg088"/>
appeal to the same text to attest His Divinity.
One denomination will assert on the authority of
Scripture that infant baptism is not necessary
for salvation, while others will hold that it is.
Some Christians, with Bible in hand, will teach
that there are no sacraments. Others will say
that there are only two. Some will declare that
the inspired Word does not preach the eternity
of punishments. Others will say that the Bible
distinctly vindicates that dogma. Do not clergymen
appear every day in the pulpit, and on the
authority of the Book of Revelation point out to
us with painful accuracy the year and the day on
which this world is to come to an end? And when
their prophecy fails of execution they coolly put
off our destruction to another time.
</p>

<p>
Very recently several hundred Mormon women
presented a petition to the government at Washington
protesting against any interference with
their abominable polygamy and they insist that
their cherished system is sustained by the Word
of God.
</p>

<p>
Such is the legitimate fruit of private interpretation!
Our civil government is run not by private
judgment, but by the constituted authorities. No
one in his senses would allow our laws to be interpreted,
and war to be declared by sensational journals,
or by any private individuals. Why not apply
the same principle to the interpretation of the
Bible and the government of the Church?
</p>

<p>
Would it not be extremely hazardous to make a
long voyage in a ship in which the officers and crew
are fiercely contending among themselves about
the manner of explaining the compass and of steering
their course? How much more dangerous is
it to trust to contending captains in the journey to
heaven! Nothing short of an infallible authority
<pb n="089"/><anchor id="Pg089"/>
should satisfy you when it is a question of steering
your course to eternity. On this vital point there
should be no conflict of opinion among those that
guide you. There should be no conjecture. But
there must be always someone at the helm whose
voice gives assurance amid the fiercest storms that
<hi rend='italic'>all is well</hi>.
</p>

<p>
Third&mdash;A rule of faith, or a competent guide
to heaven, must be able to instruct in all the truths
necessary for salvation. Now the Scriptures
alone do not contain all the truths which a Christian
is bound to believe, nor do they explicitly
enjoin all the duties which he is obliged to practice.
Not to mention other examples, is not every
Christian obliged to sanctify Sunday and to abstain
on that day from unnecessary servile work?
Is not the observance of this law among the most
prominent of our sacred duties? But you may
read the Bible from Genesis to Revelation, and
you will not find a single line authorizing the sanctification
of Sunday. The Scriptures enforce the
religious observance of Saturday, a day which
we never sanctify.
</p>

<p>
The Catholic Church correctly teaches that our
Lord and His Apostles inculcated certain important
duties of religion which are not recorded by
the inspired writers.<note place='foot'>See John
xxi. 25; II. Thess. ii. 14.</note> For instance, most Christians
pray to the Holy Ghost, a practice which is
nowhere found in the Bible.
</p>

<p>
We must, therefore, conclude that the Scriptures
<emph>alone</emph> cannot be a sufficient guide and rule
of faith because they cannot, at any time, be
within the reach of every inquirer; because they
are not of themselves clear and intelligible even
in matters of the highest importance, and because
<pb n="090"/><anchor id="Pg090"/>
they do not contain all the truths necessary for
salvation.
</p>

<p>
God forbid that any of my readers should be
tempted to conclude from what I have said that
the Catholic Church is opposed to the reading of
the Scriptures, or that she is the enemy of the
Bible. The Catholic Church the enemy of the
Bible! Good God! What monstrous ingratitude!
What base calumny is contained in that assertion!
As well might you accuse the Virgin Mother of
trying to crush the Infant Savior at her breast
as to accuse the Church, our Mother, of attempting
to crush out of existence the Word of God.
As well might you charge the patriotic statesman
with attempting to destroy the constitution of his
country, while he strove to protect it from being
mutilated by unprincipled demagogues.
</p>

<p>
For fifteen centuries the Church was the sole
guardian and depository of the Bible, and if she
really feared that sacred Book, who was to prevent
her, during that long period, from tearing it
in shreds and scattering it to the winds? She
could have thrown it into the sea, as the unnatural
mother would have thrown away her off-spring,
and who would have been the wiser?
</p>

<p>
What has become of those millions of once
famous books written in past ages? They have
nearly all perished. But amid this wreck of ancient
literature, the Bible stands almost a solitary
monument like the Pyramids of Egypt amid
the surrounding wastes. That venerable Volume
has survived the wars and revolutions and the
barbaric invasions of fifteen centuries. Who rescued
it from destruction? The Catholic Church.
Without her fostering care the New Testament
would probably be as little known today as <q>the
Book of the days of the kings of Israel.</q><note place='foot'>III.
Kings xiv. 19.</note>
</p>

<pb n="091"/><anchor id="Pg091"/>

<p>
Little do we imagine, in our age of steam printing,
how much labor it cost the Church to preserve
and perpetuate the Sacred Scriptures. Learned
monks, who are now abused in their graves by
thoughtless men, were constantly employed in
copying with the pen the Holy Bible. When one
monk died at his post another took his place,
watching like a faithful sentinel over the treasure
of God's Word.
</p>

<p>
Let me give you a few plain facts to show the
pains which the Church has taken to perpetuate
the Scriptures.
</p>

<p>
The Canon of the Bible, as we have seen, was
framed in the fourth century. In that same century
Pope Damasus commanded a new and complete
translation of the Scriptures to be made into
the Latin language, which was then the living
tongue not only of Rome and Italy, but of the
civilized world.
</p>

<p>
If the Popes were afraid that the Bible should
see the light, this was a singular way of manifesting
their fear.
</p>

<p>
The task of preparing a new edition of the
Scriptures was assigned to St. Jerome, the most
learned Hebrew scholar of his time. This new
translation was disseminated throughout Christendom,
and on that account was called the <hi rend='italic'>Vulgate</hi>,
or popular edition.
</p>

<p>
In the sixth and seventh centuries the modern
languages of Europe began to spring up like so
many shoots from the parent Latin stock. The
Scriptures, also, soon found their way into these
languages. The Venerable Bede, who lived in
England in the eighth century, and whose name
is profoundly reverenced in that country, translated
the Sacred Scriptures into Saxon, which was
<pb n="092"/><anchor id="Pg092"/>
then the language of England. He died while dictating
the last verses of St. John's Gospel.
</p>

<p>
Thomas Arundel, Archbishop of Canterbury, in
a funeral discourse on Queen Anne, consort of
Richard II., pronounced in 1394, praises her for
her diligence in reading the four Gospels. The
Head of the Church of England could not condemn
in others what he commended in the queen.
</p>

<p>
Sir Thomas More affirms that, before the days
of Wycliffe, there was an English version of the
Scriptures, <q>by good and godly people with devotion
and soberness well and reverently read.</q><note place='foot'>Dialog.
3, 14.</note>
</p>

<p>
If partial restrictions began to be placed on the
circulation of the Bible in England in the fifteenth
century, these restrictions were occasioned by the
conduct of Wycliffe and his followers, who not
only issued a new translation, on which they engrafted
their novelties of doctrine, but also sought
to explain the sacred text in a sense foreign to the
received interpretation of tradition.
</p>

<p>
While laboring to diffuse the Word of God it
is the duty, as well as the right of the Church,
as the guardian of faith, to see that the faithful
are not misled by unsound editions.
</p>

<p>
Printing was invented in the fifteenth century,
and almost a hundred years later came the Reformation.
It is often triumphantly said, and
I suppose there are some who, even at the present
day, are ignorant enough to believe the assertion,
that the first edition of the Bible ever published
after the invention of printing was the edition of
Martin Luther. The fact is, that before Luther
put his pen to paper, no fewer than fifty-six editions
of the Scriptures had appeared on the continent
of Europe, not to speak of those printed in
<pb n="093"/><anchor id="Pg093"/>
Great Britain. Of those editions, twenty-one were
published in German, one in Spanish, four in
French, twenty-one in Italian, five in Flemish and
four in Bohemian.
</p>

<p>
Coming down to our own times, if you open an
English Catholic Bible you will find in the preface
a letter of Pope Pius VI., in which he strongly
recommends the pious reading of the Holy Scriptures.
A Pope's letter is the most weighty authority
in the Church. You will also find in Haydock's
Bible the letters of the Bishops of the
United States, in which they express the hope
that this splendid edition would have a wide circulation
among their flocks.
</p>

<p>
These facts ought, I think, to convince every
candid mind that the Church, far from being opposed
to the reading of the Scriptures, does all
she can to encourage their perusal.
</p>

<p>
A gentleman of North Carolina lately informed
me that the first time he entered a Catholic bookstore
he was surprised at witnessing on the
shelves an imposing array of Bibles for sale. Up
to that moment he had believed the unfounded
charge that Catholics were forbidden to read the
Scriptures. He has since embraced the Catholic
faith.
</p>

<p>
And perhaps I may be permitted here to record
my personal experiences during a long course of
study. I speak of myself, not because my case
is exceptional, but, on the contrary, because my
example will serve to illustrate the system pursued
toward ecclesiastical students in all colleges
throughout the Catholic world in reference to the
Holy Scriptures.
</p>

<p>
In our course of Humanities we listened every
day to the reading of the Bible. When we were
advanced to the higher branches of Philosophy
<pb n="094"/><anchor id="Pg094"/>
and Theology the study of the Sacred Scriptures
formed an important part of our education. We
read, besides, every day a chapter of the New
Testament, not standing or sitting, but on our
knees, and then reverently kissed the inspired
page. We listened at our meals each day to selections
from the Bible, and we always carried about
with us a copy of the New Testament.
</p>

<p>
So familiar, indeed, were the students with the
sacred Volume that many of them, on listening to
a few verses, could tell from what portion of the
Scriptures you were reading. The only dread we
were taught to have of the Scriptures was that
of reading them without fear and reverence.
</p>

<p>
And after his ordination every Priest is obliged
in conscience to devote upwards of an hour each
day to the perusal of the Word of God. I am not
aware that clergymen of other denominations are
bound by the same duty.
</p>

<p>
What is good for the clergy must be good, also,
for the laity. Be assured that if you become a
Catholic you will never be forbidden to read the
Bible. It is our earnest wish that every word of
the Gospel may be imprinted on your memory and
on your heart.
</p>

</div>

<pb n="095"/><anchor id="Pg095"/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc' level1='Chapter IX. The Primacy Of Peter.'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='Chapter IX.'/>
<head type='sub'>Chapter IX.</head>
<head>The Primacy Of Peter.</head>

<p>
The Catholic Church teaches also, that our
Lord conferred on St. Peter the first place
of honor and jurisdiction in the government
of His whole Church, and that the same spiritual
supremacy has always resided in the Popes, or
Bishops of Rome, as being the successors of St.
Peter. Consequently, to be true followers of
Christ all Christians, both among the clergy and
the laity, must be in communion with the See
of Rome, where Peter rules in the person of his
successor.
</p>

<p>
Before coming to any direct proofs on this subject
I may state that, in the Old Law, the High
Priest appointed by Almighty God filled an office
analogous to that of Pope in the New Law. In
the Jewish Church there were Priests and Levites
ordained to minister at the altar; and there was,
also, a supreme ecclesiastical tribunal, with the
High Priest at its head. All matters of religious
controversy were referred to this tribunal and in
the last resort to the High Priest, whose decision
was enforced under pain of death. <q>If there be
a hard matter in judgment between blood and
blood, cause and cause, leprosy and leprosy, ...
thou shalt come to the Priests of the Levitical
race and to the judge, ... and they shall show
thee true judgment. And thou shalt do whatever
<pb n="096"/><anchor id="Pg096"/>
they say who preside in the place which the Lord
shall choose, and thou shalt follow their sentence.
And thou shalt not decline to the right hand, or
to the left.... But he that ... will refuse to
obey the commandment of the Priest, who ministereth
at the time, ... that man shall die, and
thou shalt take away the evil from Israel.</q><note place='foot'>Deut. xvii.</note>
</p>

<p>
From this passage it is evident that in the Hebrew
Church the High Priest had the highest
jurisdiction in religious matters. By this means
unity of faith and worship was preserved among
the people of God.
</p>

<p>
Now the Jewish synagogue, as St. Paul testifies,
was the type and figure of the Christian
Church; for <q>all these things happened to them (the
Jews) in figure.</q><note place='foot'>I. Cor. x.
11.</note> We must, therefore, find in
the Church of Christ a spiritual judge, exercising
the same supreme authority as the High Priest
wielded in the Old Law. For if a supreme Pontiff
was necessary, in the Mosaic dispensation, to
maintain purity and uniformity of worship, the
same dignitary is equally necessary now to preserve
unity of faith.
</p>

<p>
Every well-regulated civil government has an
acknowledged head. The President is the head
of the United States Government. Queen Victoria
is the ruler of Great Britain. The Sultan
sways the Turkish Empire. If these nations had
no authorized leader to govern them they would
be reduced to the condition of a mere mob, and
anarchy, confusion and civil war would inevitably
follow, as recently happened to France after the
fall of Napoleon III.
</p>

<p>
Even in every well-ordered family, domestic
peace requires that someone preside.
</p>

<p>
Now, the Church of Christ is a visible society&mdash;that
<pb n="097"/><anchor id="Pg097"/>
is, a society composed of human beings. She
has, it is true, a spiritual end in view; but having
to deal with men, she must have a government
as well as every other organized society. This
government, at least in its essential elements, our
Lord must have established for His Church. For
was He not as wise as human legislators? And
shall we suppose that, of all lawgivers, the Wisdom
Incarnate alone left His Kingdom on earth
to be governed without a head?
</p>

<p>
But someone will tell me: <q>We do not deny
that the Church has a head. God himself is its
Ruler.</q> This is evading the real question. Is
not God the Ruler of all governments? <q>By Me,</q>
He says, <q>kings reign, and lawgivers decree just
things.</q><note place='foot'>Prov. viii.
15.</note> He is the recognized Head of our Republic,
and of every Christian family in the land;
but, nevertheless, there is always presiding over
the country a visible chief, who represents God
on earth.
</p>

<p>
In like manner the Church, besides an invisible
Head in heaven, must have a visible head on
earth. The body and members of the Church are
visible; why not also the Head? The Church without
a supreme Ruler would be like an army without
a general, a navy without an admiral, a sheep-fold
without a shepherd, or like a human body
without a head.
</p>

<p>
The Christian communities separated from the
Catholic Church deny that Peter received any authority
over the other Apostles, and hence they
reject the supremacy of the Pope.
</p>

<p>
The absence from the Protestant communions
of a Divinely appointed, visible Head is to them
an endless source of weakness and dissension. It
is an insuperable barrier against any hope of a
<pb n="098"/><anchor id="Pg098"/>
permanent reunion among themselves, because
they are left without a common rallying centre or
basis of union and are placed in an unhappy state
of schism.
</p>

<p>
The existence, on the contrary, of a supreme
judge of controversy in the Catholic Church is
the secret of her admirable unity. This is the keystone
that binds together and strengthens the imperishable
arch of faith.
</p>

<p>
From the very fact, then, of the existence of a
supreme Head in the Jewish Church; from the
fact that a Head is always necessary for civil government,
for families and corporations; from the
fact, especially, that a visible Head is essential to
the maintenance of unity in the Church, while the
absence of a Head necessarily leads to anarchy,
we are forced to conclude, even though positive
evidence were wanting, that, in the establishment
of His Church, it must have entered into the mind
of the Divine Lawgiver to place over it a primate
invested with superior judicial powers.
</p>

<p>
But have we any positive proof that Christ did
appoint a supreme Ruler over His Church? To
those, indeed, who read the Scriptures with the
single eye of pure intention the most abundant
evidence of this fact is furnished. To my mind
the New Testament establishes no doctrine, unless
it satisfies every candid reader that our Lord
gave plenipotentiary powers to Peter to govern
the whole Church. In this chapter I shall speak
of the Promise, the Institution, and the exercise
of Peter's Primacy, as recorded in the New Testament.
The next chapter shall be devoted to its
perpetuity in the Popes.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Promise of the Primacy.</hi> Our Saviour, on a certain
occasion, asked His disciples, saying: <q>Whom
do men say that the Son of Man is? And they
<pb n="099"/><anchor id="Pg099"/>
said: Some say that Thou art John the Baptist;
and others, Elias; and others, Jeremiah, or one
of the Prophets. Jesus saith to them: But whom
do ye say that I am?</q> Peter, as usual, is the
leader and spokesman. <q>Simon Peter answering,
said: Thou art Christ, the Son of the living God.
And Jesus answering said to him: Blessed art
thou, Simon Bar-Jona: because flesh and blood
hath not revealed it to thee, but My Father who
is in heaven. And I say to thee: that thou art
Peter, and upon this rock I will build My Church,
and the gates of hell shall not prevail against it.
And I will give to thee the keys of the Kingdom
of Heaven: and whatsoever thou shalt bind on
earth shall be bound also in heaven; and whatsoever
thou shalt loose on earth shall be loosed also
heaven.</q><note place='foot'>Matt. xvi.
13-19.</note> Here we find Peter confessing the
Divinity of Christ, and in reward for that confession
he is honored with the promise of the
Primacy.
</p>

<p>
Our Savior, by the words <q>thou art Peter,</q>
clearly alludes to the new name which He Himself
had conferred upon Simon, when He received him
into the number of His followers (John i. 42);
and He now reveals the reason for the change of
name, which was to insinuate the honor He was to
confer on him, by appointing him President of
the Christian Republic; just as God, in the Old
Law, changed Abram's name to Abraham, when
He chose him to be the father of a mighty nation.
</p>

<p>
The word <hi rend='italic'>Peter</hi>, in the Syro-Chaldaic tongue,
which our Savior spoke, means <hi rend='italic'>a rock</hi>. The sentence
runs thus in that language: <hi rend='italic'><q>Thou art a rock,
and on this rock I will build My Church.</q></hi>
Indeed, all respectable Protestant commentators
have now abandoned, and even ridicule, the absurdity
<pb n="100"/><anchor id="Pg100"/>
of applying the word <hi rend='italic'>rock</hi> to anyone but
to Peter; as the sentence can bear no other construction,
unless our Lord's good grammar and
common sense are called in question.
</p>

<p>
Jesus, our Lord, founded but one Church, which
He was pleased to build on Peter. Therefore, any
church that does not recognize Peter as its foundation
stone is not the Church of Christ, and therefore
cannot stand, for it is not the work of God.
This is plain. Would to God that all would see it
aright and with eyes free from prejudice.
</p>

<p>
He continues: <q>And I will give to thee the
keys of the Kingdom of Heaven,</q> etc. In ancient
times, and particularly among the Hebrew people,
keys were an emblem of jurisdiction. To affirm
that a man had received the keys of a city was
equivalent to the assertion that he had been appointed
its governor. In the Book of Revelation
our Savior says that He has <q>the keys of death
and of hell,</q><note place='foot'>Rev. i.
18.</note> which means that He is endowed
with power over death and hell. In fact, even to
this day does not the presentation of keys convey
among ourselves the idea of authority? If the
proprietor of a house, on leaving it for the summer,
says to any friend: <q>Here are the keys of
my house,</q> would not this simple declaration,
without a word of explanation, convey the idea,
<q>I give you full control of my house; you may
admit or exclude whom you please; you represent
me in my absence?</q> Let us now apply this interpretation
to our Redeemer's words. When He
says to Peter: <q>I will give to thee the keys,</q> etc.,
He evidently means: I will give the supreme authority
over My Church, which is the citadel of
faith, My earthly Jerusalem. Thou and thy successors
shall be My visible representatives to the
<pb n="101"/><anchor id="Pg101"/>
end of time. And be it remembered that to Peter
alone, and to no other Apostle, were these solemn
words addressed.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Fulfillment of the Promise.</hi> The promise which
our Redeemer made of creating Peter the supreme
ruler of His Church is fulfilled in the following
passage: <q>Jesus saith to Simon Peter: Simon,
son of John, lovest thou Me more than these? He
saith to Him: Yea, Lord, Thou knowest that I
love Thee. He saith to him: Feed My lambs.
He saith to him again: Simon, son of John, lovest
thou Me? He saith to Him: Yea, Lord, Thou
knowest that I love Thee. He saith to him: Feed
My lambs. He saith to him the third time: Simon,
son of John, lovest thou Me? Peter was grieved
because He had said to him the third time: Lovest
thou Me? And he said to Him: Lord, Thou
knowest all things. Thou knowest that I love
Thee. He said to him: Feed My sheep.</q><note place='foot'>John
xxi. 15-17.</note>
</p>

<p>
These words were addressed by our Lord to
Peter after His resurrection. The whole sheep-fold
of Christ is confided to him, without any exception
or limitation. Peter has jurisdiction not
only over the lambs&mdash;the weak and tender portion
of the flock&mdash;by which are understood the faithful;
but also over the sheep, <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, the Pastors
themselves, who hold the same relations to their
congregations that the sheep hold to the lambs,
because they bring forth unto Jesus Christ, and
nourish the spiritual lambs of the fold. To other
Pastors a certain portion of the flock is assigned;
to Peter the entire fold; for, never did Jesus say
to any other Apostle or Bishop what He said to
Peter: Feed My whole flock.
</p>

<p>
Candid reader, do you not profess to be a member
of Christ's flock? Yes, you answer. Do you
<pb n="102"/><anchor id="Pg102"/>
take your spiritual food from Peter and his successor,
and do you hear the voice of Peter, or
have you wandered into the fold of strangers who
spurn Peter's voice? Ponder well this momentous
question. For if Peter is authorized to feed the
lambs of Christ's flock, the lambs should hear
Peter's voice.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Exercise of the Primacy.</hi> In the Acts of the
Apostles, which contain almost the only Scripture
narrative that exists of the Apostles subsequent
to our Lord's ascension, St. Peter appears before
us, like Saul among the tribes, standing head and
shoulders over his brethren by the prominent part
he takes in every ministerial duty.
</p>

<p>
The first twelve chapters of the Acts are devoted
to Peter and to some of the other Apostles,
the remaining chapters being chiefly occupied with
the labors of the Apostles of the Gentiles. In
that brief historical fragment, as well as in the
Gospels, the name of Peter is everywhere pre-eminent.
</p>

<p>
Peter's name always stands first in the list of
the Apostles, while Judas Iscariot is invariably
mentioned last.<note place='foot'>Matt. x. 2; Mark
iii. 16; Luke vi. 14; Acts i. 14.</note> Peter is even called by St.
Matthew <hi rend='italic'>the first Apostle</hi>. Now Peter was first
neither in age nor in priority of election, his elder
brother Andrew having been chosen before him.
The meaning, therefore, of the expression must
be that Peter was first not only in rank and honor,
but also in authority.
</p>

<p>
Peter is the first Apostle who performed a miracle.<note place='foot'>Acts iii.</note>
He is the first to address the Jews in Jerusalem
while his Apostolic brethren stand respectfully
around him, upon which occasion he converts
three thousand souls.<note place='foot'>Acts ii.</note>
</p>

<pb n="103"/><anchor id="Pg103"/>

<p>
Peter is the first to make converts from the
Gentile world in the persons of Cornelius and his
friends.<note place='foot'>Acts x.</note>
</p>

<p>
When there is question of electing a successor
to Judas Peter <emph>alone speaks</emph>. He points out to
the Apostles and disciples the duty of choosing
another to succeed the traitor. The Apostles silently
acquiesce in the instructions of their leader.<note place='foot'>Acts i.</note>
</p>

<p>
In the Apostolic Council of Jerusalem Peter is
the first whose sentiments are recorded. Before
his discourse <q>there was much disputing.</q> But
when he had ceased to speak <q>all the multitude
held their peace.</q><note place='foot'>Acts xv.</note>
</p>

<p>
St. James and the other Apostles concur in the
sentiments of Peter without a single dissenting
voice.
</p>

<p>
St. James is cast into prison by Herod and afterward
beheaded. He was one of the three most
favored Apostles. He was the cousin of our Lord
and brother of St. John. He was most dear to
the faithful. Yet no extraordinary efforts are
made by the faithful to rescue him from death.
</p>

<p>
Peter is imprisoned about the same time. The
whole Church is aroused. Prayers for his deliverance
ascend to heaven, not only from Jerusalem
but also from every Christian family in the
land.<note place='foot'>Acts xii.</note>
</p>

<p>
The army of the Lord can afford to lose a chieftain
in the person of James, but it cannot yet
spare the commander-in-chief. The enemies of the
Church had hoped that the destruction of the chief
shepherd would involve the dispersion of the
whole flock; therefore they redoubled their fury
against the Prince of the Apostles, just as her
modern enemies concentrate their shafts against
<pb n="104"/><anchor id="Pg104"/>
the Pope, his successor. Does not this incident
eloquently proclaim Peter's superior authority?
In fact Peter figures so conspicuously in every
page that his Primacy is not only admissible, but
is forced on the judgment of the impartial reader.
</p>

<p>
What are the principal objections advanced
against the Primacy of Peter? They are chiefly,
I may say exclusively, confined to the three following:
First&mdash;That our Lord rebuked Peter.
Second&mdash;That St. Paul criticised his conduct on
a point not affecting doctrine, but discipline. The
Apostle of the Gentiles blames St. Peter because
he withdrew for a time from the society of the
Gentile converts, for fear of scandalizing the
newly-converted Jews.<note place='foot'>Gal. ii.
11.</note> Third&mdash;That the supremacy
of Peter conflicts with the supreme dominion
of Christ.
</p>

<p>
For my part I cannot see how these objections
can invalidate the claims of Peter. Was not Jesus
Peter's superior? May not a superior rebuke his
servant without infringing on the servant's prerogatives?
</p>

<p>
And why could not St. Paul censure the conduct
of St. Peter without questioning that superior's
authority? It is not a very uncommon thing for
ecclesiastics occupying an inferior position in the
Church to admonish even the Pope. St. Bernard,
though only a monk, wrote a work in which, with
Apostolic freedom, he administers counsel to Pope
Eugenius III., and cautions him against the dangers
to which his eminent position exposes him.
Yet no man had more reverence for any Pope than
Bernard had for this great Pontiff. Cannot our
Governor animadvert upon the President's conduct
without impairing the President's jurisdiction?
</p>

<pb n="105"/><anchor id="Pg105"/>

<p>
Nay, from this very circumstance, I draw a
confirming evidence of Peter's supremacy. St.
Paul mentions it as a fact worthy of record that
he actually <emph>withstood Peter to his face</emph>. Do you
think it would be worth recording if Paul had rebuked
James or John or Barnabas? By no means.
If one brother rebukes another, the matter excites
no special attention. But if a son rebukes
his father, or if a Priest rebukes his Bishop to his
face, we understand why he would consider it a
fact worth relating. Hence, when St. Paul goes
to the trouble of telling us that he took exception
to Peter's conduct, he mentions it as an extraordinary
exercise of Apostolic freedom, and
leaves on our mind the obvious inference that
Peter was his superior.
</p>

<p>
In the very same Epistle to the Galatians St.
Paul plainly insinuates St. Peter's superior rank.
<q>I went,</q> he says, <q>to Jerusalem to see Peter,
and I tarried with him fifteen days.</q><note place='foot'>Gal.
i. 18.</note> Saints
Chrysostom and Ambrose tell us that this was not
an idle visit of ceremony, but that the object of St.
Paul in making the journey was to testify his respect
and honor for the chief of the Apostles. St.
Jerome observes in a humorous vein that <q>Paul
went not to behold Peter's eyes, his cheeks or his
countenance, whether he was thin or stout, with
nose straight or twisted, covered with hair or bald,
not to observe the outward man, <emph>but to show honor
to the first Apostle</emph>.</q>
</p>

<p>
There are others who pretend, in spite of our
Lord's declaration to the contrary, that loyalty
to Peter is disloyalty to Christ, and that, by acknowledging
Peter as the rock on which the
Church is built, we set our Savior aside. So far
from this being the case, we acknowledge Jesus
<pb n="106"/><anchor id="Pg106"/>
Christ as the <q>chief cornerstone,</q> as well as the
Divine Architect of the building.
</p>

<p>
The true test of loyalty to Jesus is not only
to worship Him, but to venerate even the representatives
whom He has chosen. Will anyone
pretend to say that my obedience to the Governor's
appointee is a mark of disrespect to the Governor
himself? I think our State Executive would
have little faith in the allegiance of any citizen
who would say to him: <q>Governor, I honor you
personally, but your official's order I shall disregard.</q>
</p>

<p>
St. Peter is called the first Bishop of Rome
because he transferred his see from Antioch to
Rome, where he suffered martyrdom with St. Paul.
</p>

<p>
We are not surprised that modern skepticism,
which rejects the Divinity of Christ and denies
even the existence of God, should call in question
the fact that St. Peter lived and died in Rome.
</p>

<p>
The reason commonly alleged for disputing this
well-attested event is that the Acts of the Apostles
make no mention of Peter's labors and martyrdom
in Rome. For the same reason we might deny
that St. Paul was beheaded in Rome; that St. John
died in Ephesus, and that St. Andrew was crucified.
The Scripture is silent regarding these historical
records, and yet they are denied by no one.
</p>

<p>
The intrinsic evidence of St. Peter's first Epistle,
the testimony of his immediate successors in
the ministry, as well as the avowal of eminent
Protestant commentators, all concur in fixing the
See of Peter in Rome.
</p>

<p>
<q>Babylon,</q> from which Peter addresses his
first Epistle, is understood by learned annotators,
Protestant and Catholic, to refer to Rome&mdash;the
word Babylon being symbolical of the corruption
then prevailing in the city of the Cæsars.
</p>

<pb n="107"/><anchor id="Pg107"/>

<p>
Clement, the fourth Bishop of Rome, who is
mentioned in terms of praise by St. Paul; St. Ignatius,
Bishop of Antioch, who died in 105; Irenæus,
Origen, St. Jerome, Eusebius, the great historian,
and other eminent writers testify to St. Peter's
residence in Rome, while no ancient ecclesiastical
writer has ever contradicted the statement.
</p>

<p>
John Calvin, a witness above suspicion; Cave,
an able Anglican critic; Grotius and other distinguished
Protestant writers, do not hesitate to re-echo
the unanimous voice of Catholic tradition.
</p>

<p>
Indeed, no historical fact will escape the shafts
of incredulity, if St. Peter's residence and glorious
martyrdom in Rome are called in question.
</p>

</div>

<pb n="108"/><anchor id="Pg108"/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc' level1='Chapter X. The Supremacy Of The Popes.'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='Chapter X.'/>
<head type='sub'>Chapter X.</head>
<head>The Supremacy Of The Popes.</head>

<p>
The Church did not die with Peter. It was
destined to continue till the end of time; consequently,
whatever official prerogatives were
conferred on Peter were not to cease at his death,
but were to be handed down to his successors from
generation to generation. The Church is in all
ages as much in need of a Supreme Ruler as it
was in the days of the Apostles. Nay, more; as
the Church is now more widely diffused than it
was then, and is ruled by frailer men, it is more
than ever in need of a central power to preserve
its unity of faith and uniformity of discipline.
</p>

<p>
Whatever privileges, therefore, were conferred
on Peter which may be considered essential to the
government of the Church are inherited by the
Bishops of Rome, as successors of the Prince of
the Apostles; just as the constitutional powers
given to George Washington have devolved on
the present incumbent of the Presidential chair.
</p>

<p>
Peter, it is true, besides the prerogatives inherent
in his office, possessed also the gift of inspiration
and the power of working miracles. These
two latter gifts are not claimed by the Pope, as
they were personal to Peter and by no means essential
to the government of the Church. God
acts toward His Church as we deal with a tender
sapling. When we first plant it we water it and
<pb n="109"/><anchor id="Pg109"/>
soften the clay about its roots. But when it takes
deep root we leave it to the care of Nature's laws.
In like manner, when Christ first planted His
Church He nourished its infancy by miraculous
agency; but when it grew to be a tree of fair proportions
He left it to be governed by the general
laws of His Providence.
</p>

<p>
From what I have said you can easily infer
that the arguments in favor of Peter's Primacy
have equal weight in demonstrating the supremacy
of the Popes.
</p>

<p>
As the present question, however, is a subject of
vast importance, I shall endeavor to show, from
incontestable historical evidence, that the Popes
have always, from the days of the Apostles, continued
to exercise supreme jurisdiction not only in
the Western Church till the Reformation, but also
throughout the Eastern Church till the great
schism of the ninth century.
</p>

<p>
First&mdash;Take the question of <hi rend='italic'>appeals</hi>. An appeal
is never made from a superior to an inferior court,
nor even from one court to another of co-ordinate
jurisdiction. We do not appeal from Washington
to Richmond, but from Richmond to Washington.
Now, if we find the See of Rome from the
foundation of Christianity entertaining and deciding
cases of appeal from the Oriental churches;
if we find that her decision was final and irrevocable,
we must conclude that the supremacy of Rome
over all the churches is an undeniable fact.
</p>

<p>
Let me give you a few illustrations:
</p>

<p>
To begin with Pope St. Clement, who was the
third successor of St. Peter, and who is laudably
mentioned by St. Paul in one of his Epistles. Some
dissension and scandal having occurred in the
church of Corinth, the matter is brought to the
notice of Pope Clement. He at once exercises his
<pb n="110"/><anchor id="Pg110"/>
supreme authority by writing letters of remonstrance
and admonition to the Corinthians. And
so great was the reverence entertained for these
Epistles by the faithful of Corinth that, for a
century later, it was customary to have them publicly
read in their churches. Why did the Corinthians
appeal to Rome, far away in the West,
and not to Ephesus, so near home in the East,
where the Apostle St. John still lived? Evidently
because the jurisdiction of Ephesus was local,
while that of Rome was universal.
</p>

<p>
About the year 190 the question regarding the
proper day for celebrating Easter was agitated in
the East, and referred to Pope St. Victor I. The
Eastern Church generally celebrated Easter on
the day on which the Jews kept the Passover,
while in the West it was observed then, as it is
now, on the first Sunday after the full moon of
the vernal equinox. St. Victor directs the Eastern
churches, for the sake of uniformity, to conform
to the practice of the West, and his instructions
are universally followed.
</p>

<p>
St. Cyprian, Bishop of Carthage, was martyred
in 258.
</p>

<p>
From his appeals to Pope St. Cornelius and to
Pope St. Stephen, especially on the subject of baptism,
from his writings and correspondence, as well
as from the whole tenor of his administration, it is
quite evident that Cyprian, as well as the African
Episcopate, upheld the supremacy of the Bishop of
Rome.
</p>

<p>
Dionysius, Bishop of Rome, about the middle of
the third century, having heard that the Patriarch
of Alexandria erred on some points of faith, demands
an explanation of the suspected Prelate,
who, in obedience to his superior, promptly vindicates
his own orthodoxy.
</p>

<pb n="111"/><anchor id="Pg111"/>

<p>
St. Athanasius, the great patriarch of Alexandria,
appeals in the fourth century to Pope Julius
I. from an unjust decision rendered against him
by the Oriental Bishops, and the Pope<note place='foot'>Socrates'
Ecclesiastical History, B. II., c. xv.</note> reverses the
sentence of the Eastern Council.
</p>

<p>
St. Basil, Archbishop of Cæsarea, in the same
century has recourse in his afflictions to the protection
of Pope Damasus.
</p>

<p>
St. John Chrysostom, Patriarch of Constantinople,
appeals in the beginning of the fifth century
to Pope Innocent I. for a redress of grievances inflicted
on him by several Eastern Prelates, and by
the Empress Eudoxia of Constantinople.
</p>

<p>
St. Cyril appeals to Pope Celestine against Nestorius;
Nestorius, also, appeals to the same Pontiff,
who takes the side of Cyril.
</p>

<p>
In a Synod held in 444, St. Hilary, Archbishop of
Arles, in Gaul, deposed Celidonius, Bishop of Besancon,
on the ground of an alleged canonical impediment
to his consecration. The Bishop appealed
to the Holy See, and both he and the Metropolitan
personally repaired to Rome, to submit
their cause to the judgment of Pope Leo the Great.
After a careful investigation, the Pontiff declared
the sentence of the Synod invalid, revoked the censure,
and restored the deposed Prelate to his See.
</p>

<p>
The same Pontiff also rebuked Hilary for having
irregularly deposed Projectus from his See.
</p>

<p>
The judicial authority of the Pope is emphasized
from the circumstance that Hilary was not an arrogant
or a rebellious churchman, but an edifying
and a zealous Prelate. He is revered by the whole
Church as a canonized Saint, and after his death,
Leo refers to him as Hilary of <emph>happy memory</emph>.
</p>

<pb n="112"/><anchor id="Pg112"/>

<p>
Theodoret, the illustrious historian and Bishop
of Cyrrhus, is condemned by the pseudo-council of
Ephesus in 449, and appeals to Pope Leo in the following
touching language: <q>I await the decision
of your Apostolic See, and I supplicate your Holiness
to succor me, who invoke your righteous and
just tribunal; and to order me to hasten to you,
and to explain to you my teaching, which follows
the steps of the Apostles.... I beseech you not
to scorn my application. Do not slight my gray
hairs.... Above all, I entreat you to teach me
whether to put up with this unjust deposition or
not; for I await your sentence. If you bid me
rest in what has been determined against me, I
will rest, and will trouble no man more. I will
look for the righteous judgment of our God and
Savior. To me, as Almighty God is my Judge,
honor and glory are no object, but only the scandal
that has been caused; for many of the simpler
sort, especially those whom I have rescued from
diverse heresies, considering <emph>the See</emph> which has
condemned me, suspect that perhaps I really am a
heretic, being incapable themselves of distinguishing
accuracy of doctrine.</q><note place='foot'>Epist.
113.</note> Leo declared the
deposition invalid and Theodoret was restored to
his See.
</p>

<p>
John, Abbot of Constantinople, appeals from
the decision of the Patriarch of that city to Pope
St. Gregory I., who reverses the sentence of the
Patriarch.
</p>

<p>
In 859 Photius addressed a letter to Pope
Nicholas I., asking the Pontiff to confirm his election
to the Patriarchate of Constantinople. In
consequence of the Pope's conscientious refusal
Photius broke off from the communion of the
Catholic Church and became the author of the
Greek schism.
</p>

<pb n="113"/><anchor id="Pg113"/>

<p>
Here are a few examples taken at random from
Church History. We see Prelates most eminent
for their sanctity and learning occupying the highest
position in the Eastern Church, and consequently
far removed from the local influences of
Rome, appealing in every period of the early
Church from the decisions of their own Bishops
and their Councils to the supreme arbitration of
the Holy See. If this does not constitute superior
jurisdiction, I have yet to learn what superior authority
means.
</p>

<p>
Second&mdash;Christians of every denomination admit
the orthodoxy of <emph>the Fathers</emph> of the first five
centuries of the Church. No one has ever called
in question the faith of such men as Basil, Chrysostom,
Cyprian, Augustine, Jerome, Ambrose and
Leo. They were the acknowledged guardians of
pure doctrine, and the living representatives <q>of
the faith once delivered to the Saints.</q> They were
to the Church in their generation what Peter and
Paul and James were to the Church in its infancy.
We instinctively consult them about the faith of
those times; for, to whom shall we go for the
Words of eternal life, if not to them?
</p>

<p>
Now, the Fathers of the Church, with one voice,
pay homage to the Bishops of Rome as their superiors.
The limited space I have allowed myself
in this little volume will not permit me to give
any extracts from their writings. The reader who
may be unacquainted with the original language
of the Fathers, or who has not their writings at
hand, is referred to a work entitled, <q>Faith of
Catholics,</q> where he will find, in an English translation,
copious extracts from their writings vindicating
the Primacy of the Popes.
</p>

<p>
Third&mdash;<emph>Ecumenical Councils</emph> afford another eloquent
vindication of Papal supremacy. An Ecumenical
<pb n="114"/><anchor id="Pg114"/>
or General Council is an assemblage of
Prelates representing the whole Catholic Church.
A General Council is to the Church what the Executive
and Legislative bodies in Washington are
to the United States.
</p>

<p>
Up to the present time nineteen Ecumenical
Councils have been convened, including the Council
of the Vatican. The last eleven were held in
the West, and the first eight in the East. I shall
pass over the Western Councils, as no one denies
that they were subject to the authority of the
Pope.
</p>

<p>
I shall speak briefly of the important influence
which the Holy See exercised in the eight Oriental
Councils.
</p>

<p>
The first General Council was held in Nicæa,
in 325; the second, in Constantinople, 381; the
third, in Ephesus, in 431; the fourth, in Chalcedon,
in 451; the fifth, in Constantinople, in 553;
the sixth in the same city, in 680; the seventh, in
Nicæa, in 787, and the eighth, in Constantinople,
in 869.
</p>

<p>
The Bishops of Rome convoked these assemblages,
or at least consented to their convocation;
they presided by their legates over all of them,
except the first and second Councils of Constantinople,
and they confirmed all these eight by their
authority. Before becoming a law the Acts of the
Councils required the Pope's signature, just as
our Congressional proceedings require the President's
signature before they acquire the force of
law.
</p>

<p>
Is not this a striking illustration of the Primacy?
The Pope convenes, rules and sanctions the
Synods, not by courtesy, but by right. A dignitary
who calls an assembly together, who presides
over its deliberations, whose signature is essential
<pb n="115"/><anchor id="Pg115"/>
for confirming its Acts has surely a higher
authority than the other members.
</p>

<p>
Fourth&mdash;I shall refer to one more historical
point in support of the Pope's jurisdiction over
the whole Church. It is a most remarkable fact
that <emph>every nation hitherto converted from Paganism
to Christianity since the days of the Apostles,
has received the light of faith from missionaries
who were either especially commissioned by the
See of Rome, or sent by Bishops in open communion
with that See</emph>. This historical fact admits of
no exception. Let me particularize.
</p>

<p>
Ireland's Apostle is St. Patrick. Who commissioned
him? Pope St. Celestine, in the fifth century.
</p>

<p>
St. Palladius is the Apostle of Scotland. Who
sent him? The same Pontiff, Celestine.
</p>

<p>
The Anglo-Saxons received the faith from St.
Augustine, a Benedictine monk, as all historians,
Catholic and non-Catholic, testify. Who empowered
Augustine to preach? Pope Gregory I., at
the end of the sixth century.
</p>

<p>
St. Remigius established the faith in France, at
the close of the fifth century. He was in active
communion with the See of Peter.
</p>

<p>
Flanders received the Gospel in the seventh century
from St. Eligius, who acknowledged the supremacy
of the reigning Pope.
</p>

<p>
Germany and Bavaria venerate as their Apostle
St. Boniface, who is popularly known in his native
England by his baptismal name of Winfrid. He
was commissioned by Pope Gregory II., in the beginning
of the eighth century, and was consecrated
Bishop by the same Pontiff.
</p>

<p>
In the ninth century two saintly brothers, Cyril
and Methodius, evangelized Russia, Sclavonia,
Moravia and other parts of Northern Europe.
<pb n="116"/><anchor id="Pg116"/>
They recognized the supreme authority of Pope
Nicholas I. and of his successors, Adrian II. and
John VIII.
</p>

<p>
In the eleventh century Norway was converted
by missionaries introduced from England by the
Norwegian King, St. Olave.
</p>

<p>
The conversion of Sweden was consummated in
the same century by the British Apostles Saints
Ulfrid and Eskill. Both of these nations immediately
after their conversion commenced to pay
Romescot, or a small annual tribute to the Holy
See&mdash;a clear evidence that they were in communion
with the Chair of Peter.<note place='foot'>See Butler's
Lives of the Saints&mdash;St. Olave, July 29th.</note>
</p>

<p>
All the other nations of Europe, having been
converted before the Reformation, received likewise
the light of faith from Roman Catholic Missionaries,
because Europe then recognized only
one Christian Chief.
</p>

<p>
Passing from Europe to Asia and America, it
is undeniable that St. Francis Xavier and the other
Evangelists who, in the sixteenth century, extended
the Kingdom of Jesus Christ through
India and Japan, were in communion with the
Holy See; and that those Apostles who, in the
sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, converted the
aboriginal tribes of South America and Mexico received
their commission from the Chair of Peter.
</p>

<p>
But you will say: The people of the United
States profess to be a Christian nation. Do you
also claim them? Most certainly; for, even those
American Christians who are unhappily severed
from the Catholic Church are primarily indebted
for their knowledge of the Gospel to missionaries
in communion with the Holy See.
</p>

<p>
The white races of North America are descended
from England, Ireland, Scotland and the nations
<pb n="117"/><anchor id="Pg117"/>
of Continental Europe. Those European nations
having been converted by missionaries in subjection
to the Holy See, it follows that, from whatever
part of Europe you are descended, whatever
may be your particular creed, you are indebted
to the Church of Rome for your knowledge of
Christianity.
</p>

<p>
Do not these facts demonstrate the Primacy of
the Pope? The Apostles of Europe and of other
countries received their authority from Rome. Is
not the power that sends an ambassador greater
than he who is sent?
</p>

<p>
Thus we see that the name of the Pope is indelibly
marked on every page of ecclesiastical history.
The Sovereign Pontiff ever stands before
us as commander-in-chief in the grand army of
the Church. Do the bishops of the East feel themselves
aggrieved at home by their Patriarchs or
civil Rulers? They look for redress to Rome, as
to the star of their hope. Are the Fathers and
Doctors of the early Church consulted? With
one voice they all pay homage to the Bishop of
Rome as to their spiritual Prince. Is an Ecumenical
Council to be convened in the East or West?
The Pope is its leading spirit. Are new nations
to be converted to the faith? There is the Holy
Father clothing the missionaries with authority,
and giving his blessing to the work. Are new errors
to be condemned in any part of the globe?
All eyes turn toward the oracle of Rome to await
his anathema, and his solemn judgment reverberates
throughout the length and breath of the Christian
world.
</p>

<p>
You might as well shut out the light of day
and the air of heaven from your daily walks as
exclude the Pope from his legitimate sphere in the
hierarchy of the Church. The history of the
<pb n="118"/><anchor id="Pg118"/>
United States with the Presidents left out would
be more intelligible than the history of the Church
to the exclusion of the Vicar of Christ. How, I
ask, could such authority endure so long if it were
a usurpation?
</p>

<p>
But you will tell me: <q>The supremacy of the
Pope has been disputed in many ages.</q> So has
the authority of God been called in question&mdash;nay,
His very existence has been denied; for, <q>the fool
hath said in his heart there is no God.</q><note place='foot'>Ps. lii.</note> Does
this denial destroy the existence and dominion of
God? Has not parental authority been impugned
from the beginning? But by whom? By unruly
children. Was David no longer king because Absalom
said so?
</p>

<p>
It is thus also with the Popes. Their parental
sway has been opposed only by their undutiful
sons who grew impatient of the Gospel yoke.
Photius, the leader of the Greek schism, was an
obedient son of the Pope until Nicholas refused
to recognize his usurped authority. Henry VIII.
was a stout defender of the Pope's supremacy until
Clement VII. refused to legalize his adultery.
Luther professed a most abject submission to the
Pope till Leo X. condemned him.
</p>

<p>
You cannot, my dear reader, be a loyal citizen
of the United States while you deny the constitutional
authority of the President. You have seen
that the Bishop of Rome is appointed not by man,
but by Jesus Christ, President of the Christian
commonwealth. You cannot, therefore, be a true
citizen of the Republic of the Church so long as
you spurn the legitimate supremacy of its Divinely
constituted Chief. <q>He that is not with
Me is against Me,</q> says our Lord, <q>and he that
gathereth not with Me scattereth.</q> How can you
<pb n="119"/><anchor id="Pg119"/>
be with Christ if you are against His Vicar?
</p>

<p>
The great evil of our times is the unhappy division
existing among the professors of Christianity,
and from thousands of hearts a yearning cry
goes forth for unity of faith and union of churches.
</p>

<p>
It was, no doubt, with this laudable view that
the Evangelical Alliance assembled in New York
in the fall of 1873. The representatives of the
different religious communions hoped to effect a
reunion. But they signally and lamentably failed.
Indeed, the only result which followed from the
alliance was the creation of a new sect under the
auspices of Dr. Cummins. That reverend gentleman,
with the characteristic modesty of all religious
reformers, was determined to have a hand
in improving the work of Jesus Christ; and, like
the other reformers, he said, with those who built
the tower of Babel: <q>Let us make our name
famous before</q><note place='foot'>Gen. xi.
4.</note> our dust is scattered to the wind.
</p>

<p>
The Alliance failed, because its members had no
common platform to stand on. There was no voice
in that assembly that could say with authority:
<q>Thus saith the Lord.</q>
</p>

<p>
I heartily join in this prayer for Christian unity,
and gladly would surrender my life for such a
consummation. But I tell you that Jesus Christ
has pointed out the only means by which this unity
can be maintained, viz: the recognition of Peter
and his successors as the Head of the Church.
Build upon this foundation and you will not erect
a tower of Babel, nor build upon sand. If all
Christian sects were united with the centre of
unity, then the scattered hosts of Christendom
would form an army which atheism and infidelity
could not long withstand. Then, indeed, all could
exclaim with Balaam: <q>How beautiful are thy
<pb n="120"/><anchor id="Pg120"/>
tabernacles, O Jacob, and thy tents, O Israel!</q><note place='foot'>Numb.
xxiv. 5.</note>
</p>

<p>
Let us pray that the day may be hastened when
religious dissensions will cease; when all Christians
will advance with united front, under one
common leader, to plant the cross in every region
and win new kingdoms to Jesus Christ.
</p>

</div>

<pb n="121"/><anchor id="Pg121"/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc' level1='Chapter XI. Infallibility Of The Popes.'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='Chapter XI.'/>
<head type='sub'>Chapter XI.</head>
<head>Infallibility Of The Popes.</head>

<p>
As the doctrine of Papal Infallibility is
strangely misapprehended by our separated
brethren, because it is grievously
misrepresented by those who profess to be enlightened
ministers of the Gospel, I shall begin
by stating what Infallibility does not mean, and
shall then explain what it really is.
</p>

<p>
First&mdash;The infallibility of the Popes does not
signify that they are inspired. The Apostles were
endowed with the gift of inspiration, and we accept
their writings as the revealed Word of God.
</p>

<p>
No Catholic, on the contrary, claims that the
Pope is inspired or endowed with Divine revelation
properly so called.
</p>

<p>
<q>For the Holy Spirit was not promised to the
successors of Peter in order that they might
spread abroad new doctrine which He reveals, but
that, under His assistance, they might guard inviolably,
and with fidelity explain, the revelation
or deposit of faith handed down by the Apostles.</q><note place='foot'>Conc.
Vat. Const. <hi rend='italic'>Pastor Æternus</hi>, c. 4.</note>
</p>

<p>
Second&mdash;Infallibility does not mean that the
Pope is impeccable or specially exempt from liability
to sin. The Popes have been, indeed, with
few exceptions, men of virtuous lives. Many of
them are honored as martyrs. Seventy-nine out
<pb n="122"/><anchor id="Pg122"/>
of the two hundred and fifty-nine that sat on the
chair of Peter are invoked upon our altars as
saints eminent for their holiness.
</p>

<p>
The avowed enemies of the Church charge only
five or six Popes with immorality. Thus, even
admitting the truth of the accusations brought
against them, we have forty-three virtuous to one
bad Pope, while there was a Judas Iscariot among
the twelve Apostles.
</p>

<p>
But although a vast majority of the Sovereign
Pontiffs should have been so unfortunate as to
lead vicious lives, this circumstance would not of
itself impair the validity of their prerogatives,
which are given not for the preservation of their
morals, but for the guidance of their judgment;
for, there was a Balaam among the Prophets, and
a Caiphas among the High Priests of the Old
Law.
</p>

<p>
The present illustrious Pontiff is a man of no
ordinary sanctity. He has already filled the highest
position in the Church for upwards of thirty
years, <q>a spectacle to the world, to angels and
to men,</q> and no man can point out a stain upon
his moral character.
</p>

<p>
And yet Pius IX., like his predecessors, confesses
his sins every week. Each morning, at the
beginning of Mass, he says at the foot of the altar,
<q>I confess to Almighty God, and to His Saints,
that I have sinned exceedingly in thought, word
and deed.</q> And at the Offertory of the Mass
he says: <q>Receive, O Holy Father, almighty,
everlasting God, this oblation which I, Thy unworthy
servant, offer for my innumerable sins,
offences and negligences.</q>
</p>

<p>
With these facts before their eyes, I cannot
comprehend how ministers of the Gospel betray
so much ignorance, or are guilty of so much malice,
<pb n="123"/><anchor id="Pg123"/>
as to proclaim from their pulpits, which ought to
be consecrated to truth, that Infallibility means
exemption from sin. I do not see how they can
benefit their cause by so flagrant perversions of
truth.
</p>

<p>
Third&mdash;Bear in mind, also, that this Divine assistance
is guaranteed to the Pope not in his capacity
as private teacher, but only in his official
capacity, when he judges of faith and morals as
Head of the Church. If a Pope, for instance, like
Benedict XIV. were to write a treatise on Canon
Law his book would be as much open to criticism
as that of any Doctor of the Church.
</p>

<p>
Fourth&mdash;Finally, the inerrability of the Popes,
being restricted to questions of faith and morals,
does not extend to the natural sciences, such as
astronomy or geology, unless where error is presented
under the false name of science, and arrays
itself against revealed truth.<note place='foot'>Conc.
Vat. Const. <hi rend='italic'>Dei Filius</hi>, cap. 4;
Coloss. ii. 8.</note> It does not,
therefore, concern itself about the nature and motions
of the planets. Nor does it regard purely
political questions, such as the form of government
a nation ought to adopt, or for what candidates
we ought to vote.
</p>

<p>
The Pope's Infallibility, therefore, does not in
any way trespass on civil authority; for the
Pope's jurisdiction belongs to spiritual matters,
while the duty of the State is to provide for the
temporal welfare of its subjects.
</p>

<p>
What, then, is the real doctrine of Infallibility?
It simply means that the Pope, as successor of
St. Peter, Prince of the Apostles, by virtue of
the promises of Jesus Christ, is preserved from
error of judgment when he promulgates to the
Church a decision on faith or morals.
</p>

<p>
The Pope, therefore, be it known, is not the
<pb n="124"/><anchor id="Pg124"/>
maker of the Divine law; he is only its expounder.
He is not the author of revelation, but only its interpreter.
All revelation came from God alone
through His inspired ministers, and it was complete
in the beginning of the Church. The Holy
Father has no more authority than you or I to
break one iota of the Scripture, and he is equally
with us the servant of the Divine law.
</p>

<p>
In a word, the Sovereign Pontiff is to the
Church, though in a more eminent degree, what
the Supreme Court is to the United States. We
have an instrument called the Constitution of the
United States, which is the charter of our civil
rights and liberties. If a controversy arise regarding
a constitutional clause, the question is referred
in the last resort, to the Supreme Court at Washington.
The Chief Justice, with his associate
judges, examines into the case and then pronounces
judgment upon it; and this decision is final, irrevocable
and practically infallible.
</p>

<p>
If there were no such court to settle constitutional
questions, the Constitution itself would soon
become a dead letter. Every litigant would conscientiously
decide the dispute in his own favor
and anarchy, separation and civil war would soon
follow. But by means of this Supreme Court disputes
are ended, and the political union of the
States is perpetuated. There would have been no
civil war in 1861 had our domestic quarrel been
submitted to the legitimate action of our highest
court of judicature, instead of being left to the
arbitrament of the sword.
</p>

<p>
The revealed Word of God is the constitution
of the Church. This is the <hi rend='italic'>Magna Charta</hi> of our
Christian liberties. The Pope is the official guardian
<pb n="125"/><anchor id="Pg125"/>
of our religious constitution, as the Chief
Justice is the guardian of our civil constitution.
</p>

<p>
When a dispute arises in the Church regarding
the sense of Scripture the subject is referred to
the Pope for final adjudication. The Sovereign
Pontiff, before deciding the case, gathers around
him his venerable colleagues, the Cardinals of the
Church; or he calls a council of his associate
judges of faith, the Bishops of Christendom; or he
has recourse to other lights which the Holy Ghost
may suggest to him. Then, after mature and
prayerful deliberation, he pronounces judgment
and his sentence is final, irrevocable and infallible.
</p>

<p>
If the Catholic Church were not fortified by this
Divinely-established supreme tribunal, she would
be broken up, like the sects around her, into a
thousand fragments and religious anarchy would
soon follow. But by means of this infallible court
her marvellous unity is preserved throughout the
world. This doctrine is the keystone in the arch
of Catholic faith, and, far from arousing opposition,
it ought to command the unqualified admiration
of every reflecting mind.
</p>

<p>
These explanations being premised, let us now
briefly consider the grounds of the doctrine itself.
</p>

<p>
The following passages of the Gospel, spoken
at different times, were addressed exclusively to
Peter: <q>Thou art Peter; and on this rock I will
build My Church, and the gates of hell shall not
prevail against it.</q><note place='foot'>Matt.
xvi.</note> <q>I, the Supreme Architect
of the universe,</q> says our Savior, <q>will establish
a Church which is to last till the end of time. I
will lay the foundation of this Church so deep
and strong on the rock of truth that the winds
and storms of error shall not prevail against it.
Thou, O Peter, shalt be the foundation of this
<pb n="126"/><anchor id="Pg126"/>
Church. It shall never fall, because thou shalt
never be shaken; and thou shalt never be shaken,
because thou shalt rest on Me, the rock of truth.</q>
The Church, of which Peter is the foundation, is
declared to be impregnable&mdash;that is, proof against
error. How can you suppose an immovable edifice
built on a tottering foundation? For it is not
the building that sustains the foundation, but it is
the foundation that supports the building.
</p>

<p>
<q>And I will give to thee the keys of the Kingdom
of Heaven.</q><note place='foot'>Matt.
xvi.</note> Thou shalt hold the keys of
truth with which to open to the faithful the treasures
of heavenly science. <q>Whatsoever thou shalt
bind on earth shall be bound also in Heaven.</q><note place='foot'>Ibid.</note>
The judgment which thou shalt pronounce on earth
I will ratify in heaven. Surely the God of Truth
is incapable of sanctioning an untruthful judgment.
</p>

<p>
<q>Behold, Satan hath desired to have you (My
Apostles), that he may sift <emph>you</emph> as wheat. But
I have prayed for <emph>thee</emph> (Peter) that thy faith fail
not; and thou, being once converted, confirm thy
brethren.</q><note place='foot'>Luke xxii.
31, 32.</note> It is worthy of note that Jesus
prays only for Peter. And why for Peter in particular?
Because on his shoulders was to rest
the burden of the Church. Our Lord prays for
two things: First&mdash;That the faith of Peter and
of his successors might not fail. Second&mdash;That
Peter would confirm his brethren in the faith, <q>in
order,</q> as St. Leo says, <q>that the strength given
by Christ to Peter should descend on the Apostles.</q>
</p>

<p>
We know that the prayer of Jesus is always
heard. Therefore the faith of Peter will always
be firm. He was destined to be the oracle which
all were to consult. Hence we always find him the
<pb n="127"/><anchor id="Pg127"/>
prominent figure among the Apostles, the first to
speak, the first to act on every occasion. He was
to be the guiding star that was to lead the rest
of the faithful in the path of truth. He was to
be in the hierarchy of the Church what the sun
is in the planetary system&mdash;the centre around
which all would revolve. And is it not a beautiful
spectacle, in harmony with our ideas of God's
providence, to behold in His Church a counterpart
of the starry system above us? There every
planet moves in obedience to a uniform law, all
are regulated by one great luminary. So, in the
spiritual order, we see every member of the
Church governed by one law, controlled by one
voice, and that voice subject to God.
</p>

<p>
<q>Feed My lambs; feed My sheep.</q><note place='foot'>John
xxi. 16, 17.</note> Peter is
appointed by our Lord the universal shepherd of
His flock&mdash;of the sheep and of the lambs&mdash;that
is, shepherd of the Bishops and Priests as well
as of the people. The Bishops are shepherds, in
reference to their flocks; they are sheep, in reference
to the Pope, who is the shepherd of shepherds.
The Pope, as shepherd, must feed the flock
not with the poison of error, but with the healthy
food of sound doctrine; for he is not a shepherd,
but a hireling, who administers pernicious food
to his flock.
</p>

<p>
Among the General Councils of the Church already
held I shall mention only three, as the acts
of these Councils are amply sufficient to vindicate
the unerring character of the See of Rome and
the Roman Pontiffs. I wish also to call your
attention to three facts: First&mdash;That none of
these Councils were held in Rome; Second&mdash;That
one of them assembled in the East, viz: in Constantinople;
and, Third&mdash;That in every one of
<pb n="128"/><anchor id="Pg128"/>
them the Oriental and the Western Bishops met
for the purpose of reunion.
</p>

<p>
The Eighth General Council, held in Constantinople
in 869, contains the following solemn profession
of faith: <q>Salvation primarily depends
upon guarding the rule of right faith. And since
we cannot pass over the words of our Lord Jesus
Christ, who says, <q>Thou art Peter, and on this
rock I will build My Church,</q> what was said is
confirmed by facts, because in the Apostolic See
the Catholic religion has always been preserved
immaculate, and holy doctrine has been proclaimed.
Not wishing, then, to be separated from
this faith and doctrine, we hope to merit to be in
the one communion which the Apostolic See
preaches, in which See is the full and true solidity
of the Christian religion.</q>
</p>

<p>
This Council clearly declares that <emph>immaculate
doctrine</emph> has always <emph>been preserved and preached
in the Roman See</emph>. But how could this be said of
her, if the Roman See ever fell into error, and how
could that See be preserved from error, if the
Roman Pontiffs presiding over it ever erred in
faith?
</p>

<p>
In the Second General Council of Lyons (1274),
the Greek Bishops made the following profession
of faith: <q>The holy Roman Church possesses full
primacy and principality over the universal Catholic
Church, which primacy, with the plenitude of
power, she truly and humbly acknowledges to
have received from our Lord Himself, in the person
of Blessed Peter, Prince or Head of the Apostles,
whose successor the Roman Pontiff is; and
as the Roman See, above all others, is bound to
defend the truth of faith, so, also, <emph>if any questions
on faith arise, they ought to be defined by
her judgment</emph>.</q>
</p>

<pb n="129"/><anchor id="Pg129"/>

<p>
Here the Council of Lyons avows that the Roman
Pontiffs have the power to determine definitely,
and without appeal, any questions of faith
which may arise in the Church; in other words,
the Council acknowledges them to be the supreme
and infallible arbiters of faith.
</p>

<p>
<q>We define,</q> says the Council of Florence
(1439), at which also were present the Bishops
of the Greek and the Latin Church, <q>we define
that the Roman Pontiff is the successor of the
Blessed Peter, Prince of the Apostles, and <emph>the
true Vicar of Christ, the Head</emph> of the whole
Church, the Father and Doctor of all Christians,
and we declare that to him, in the person of
Blessed Peter, was given, by Jesus Christ our
Savior, full power to feed, rule and govern the
universal Church.</q>
</p>

<p>
The Pope is here called the <hi rend='italic'>true Vicar</hi> or representative
of Christ in this lower kingdom of His
Church militant&mdash;that is, the Pope is the organ of
our Savior, and speaks His sentiments in faith
and morals. But if the Pope erred in faith and
morals he would no longer be Christ's Vicar and
true representative. Our minister in England, for
instance, would not truly represent our Government
if he was not the organ of its sentiments.
The Roman Pontiff is called the <hi rend='italic'>Head</hi> of the whole
Church&mdash;that is, the visible Head. Now the
Church, which is the Body of Christ, is infallible.
It is, as St. Paul says, <q>without spot or wrinkle,
or any such thing.</q> But how can you suppose
an infallible body with a fallible head? How can
an erring head conduct a body in the unerring
ways of truth and justice?
</p>

<p>
He is declared by the same Council to be the
<hi rend='italic'>Father</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>Doctor</hi> of all Christians.
How can you expect an unerring family under an erring
<pb n="130"/><anchor id="Pg130"/>
Father? The Pope is called the universal teacher
or doctor. Teacher of what? Of truth, not of
error. Error is to the mind what poison is to the
body. You do not call poison food; neither can
you call error doctrine. The Pope, as universal
teacher, must always give to the faithful not the
poisonous food of error, but the sound aliment of
pure doctrine.
</p>

<p>
In fine, the Pope is also styled the <hi rend='italic'>Chief Pilot</hi>
of the Church. It was not without a mysterious
significance that our Lord entered Peter's bark
instead of that of any of the other Apostles. This
bark, our Lord has pledged Himself, shall never
sink nor depart from her true course. How can
you imagine a stormproof, never-varying bark under
the charge of a fallible Pilot?
</p>

<p>
But did not the Vatican Council in promulgating
the definition of Papal Infallibility in 1870, create a
new doctrine of revelation? And did not the
Church thereby forfeit her glorious distinction of
being always unchangeable in her teaching?
</p>

<p>
The Council did not create a new creed, but
rather confirmed the old one. It formulated into
an article of faith a truth which in every age had
been accepted by the Catholic world because it had
been implicitly contained in the deposit of revelation.
</p>

<p>
I may illustrate this point by referring again to
our Supreme Court. When the Chief Justice, with
his colleagues, decides a constitutional question,
his decision, though presented in a new shape, cannot
be called a new doctrine, because it is based on
the letter and spirit of the Constitution.
</p>

<p>
In like manner, when the Church issues a new
dogma of faith, that decree is nothing more than
a new form of expressing an old doctrine, because
the decision must be drawn from the revealed
Word of God.
</p>

<pb n="131"/><anchor id="Pg131"/>

<p>
The course pursued by the Church, regarding
the infallibility of the Pope was practiced by her
in reference to the Divinity of Jesus Christ. Our
Savior was acknowledged to be God from the beginning
of the Church. Yet His Divinity was not
formally defined till the Council of Nicæa in the
fourth century, and it would not have been defined
even then had it not been denied by Arius. And
who will have the presumption to say that the belief
in the Divinity of our Lord had its origin in
the fourth century?
</p>

<p>
The following has always been the practice prevailing
in the Church of God from the beginning
of her history. Whenever Bishops or National
Councils promulgated doctrines or condemned errors
they always transmitted their decrees to
Rome for confirmation or rejection. What Rome
approved, the universal Church approved; what
Rome condemned, the Church condemned.
</p>

<p>
Thus, in the third century, Pope St. Stephen
reverses the decision of St. Cyprian, of Carthage,
and of a council of African bishops regarding a
question of baptism.
</p>

<p>
Pope St. Innocent I., in the fifth century, condemns
the Pelagian heresy, in reference to which
St. Augustine wrote this memorable sentence:
<q>The acts of two councils were sent to the Apostolic
See, whence an answer was returned. The
<emph>question is ended</emph>. Would to God that the error
also had ceased.</q>
</p>

<p>
In the fourteenth century Gregory XI. condemns
the heresy of Wycliffe.
</p>

<p>
Pope Leo X., in the sixteenth, anathematizes
Luther.
</p>

<p>
Innocent X., in the seventeenth, at the solicitation
of the French Episcopate, condemns the subtle
errors of the Jansenists, and in the nineteenth
<pb n="132"/><anchor id="Pg132"/>
century Pius IX. promulgates the doctrine of the
Immaculate Conception.
</p>

<p>
Here we find the Popes in various ages condemning
heresies and proclaiming doctrines of
faith; and they could not in a stronger manner
assert their infallibility than by so defining doctrines
of faith and condemning errors. We also
behold the Church of Christendom ever saying
Amen to the decisions of the Bishops of Rome.
Hence it is evident that, in every age, the Church
recognized the Popes as infallible teachers.
</p>

<p>
Every independent government must have a supreme
tribunal regularly sitting to interpret its
laws, and to decide cases of controversy likely to
arise. Thus we have in Washington the Supreme
Court of the United States.
</p>

<p>
Now the Catholic Church is a complete and independent
organization, as complete in its spiritual
sphere as the United States Government is in
the temporal order. The Church has its own laws,
its own autonomy and government.
</p>

<p>
The Church, therefore, like civil powers, must
have a permanent and stationary supreme tribunal
to interpret its laws and to determine cases of
religious controversy.
</p>

<p>
What constitutes this permanent supreme court
of the Church? Does it consist of the Bishops
assembled in General Council? No; because this
is not an ordinary but an extraordinary tribunal
which meets, on an average, only once in a hundred
years.
</p>

<p>
Is it composed of the Bishops scattered throughout
the world? By no means, because it would be
impracticable to consult all the Bishops of Christendom
upon every issue that might arise in the
Church. The poison of error would easily spread
through the body of the Church before a decision
<pb n="133"/><anchor id="Pg133"/>
could be rendered by the Prelates dispersed
throughout the globe. The Pope, then, as Head
of the Catholic Church, constitutes, with just reason,
this supreme tribunal.
</p>

<p>
And as the office of the Church is to guide men
into all truth, and to preserve them from all error,
it follows that he who is appointed to watch over
the constitution of the Church must be infallible,
or exempt from error in his official capacity as
judge of faith and morals. The prerogatives of
the Pope must be commensurate with the nature
of the constitution which he has to uphold. The
constitution is Divine and must have a Divinely
protected interpreter.
</p>

<p>
But you will tell me that infallibility is too
great a prerogative to be conferred on man. I
answer: Has not God, in former times, clothed
His Apostles with powers far more exalted? They
were endowed with the gifts of working miracles,
of prophecy and inspiration; they were the mouth-piece
communicating God's revelation, of which
the Popes are merely the custodians. If God could
make man the organ of His revealed Word, is it
impossible for Him to make man its infallible guardian
and interpreter? For, surely, greater is the
Apostle who gives us the inspired Word than the
Pope who preserves it from error.
</p>

<p>
If, indeed, our Saviour had visibly remained
among us, no interpreter would be needed, since
He would explain His Gospel to us; but as He withdrew
His visible presence from us, it was eminently
reasonable that He should designate someone to
expound for us the meaning of His Word.
</p>

<p>
A Protestant Bishop, in the course of a sermon
against Papal Infallibility, recently used the following
language: <q>For my part, I have an infallible
<pb n="134"/><anchor id="Pg134"/>
Bible, and this is the only infallibility that
I require.</q> This assertion, though plausible at
first sight, cannot for a moment stand the test of
sound criticism.
</p>

<p>
Let us see, sir, whether an infallible Bible is
sufficient for you. Either you are infallibly certain
that your interpretation of the Bible is correct
or you are not.
</p>

<p>
If you are infallibly certain, then you assert
for yourself, and of course for every reader of the
Scripture, a personal infallibility which you deny
to the Pope, and which we claim only for him.
You make every man his own Pope.
</p>

<p>
If you are not infallibly certain that you understand
the true meaning of the whole Bible&mdash;and
this is a privilege you do not claim&mdash;then, I ask,
of what use to you is the objective infallibility of
the Bible without an infallible interpreter?
</p>

<p>
If God, as you assert, has left no infallible interpreter
of His Word, do you not virtually accuse
Him of acting unreasonably? for would it not be
most unreasonable in Him to have revealed His
truth to man without leaving him a means of ascertaining
its precise import?
</p>

<p>
Do you not reduce God's word to a bundle of
contradictions, like the leaves of the Sybil, which
gave forth answers suited to the wishes of every
inquirer?
</p>

<p>
Of the hundred and more Christian sects now
existing in this country, does not each take the
Bible as its standard of authority, and does not
each member draw from it a meaning different
from that of his neighbor? Now, in the mind of
God the Scriptures can have but one meaning. Is
not this variety of interpretations the bitter fruit
of your principle: <q>An infallible Bible is enough
for me,</q> and does it not proclaim the absolute
<pb n="135"/><anchor id="Pg135"/>
necessity of some authorized and unerring interpreter?
You tell me to drink of the water of life;
but of what use is this water to my parched lips,
since you acknowledge that it may be poisoned in
passing through the medium of your interpretation?
</p>

<p>
How satisfactory, on the contrary, and how reasonable
is the Catholic teaching on this subject!
</p>

<p>
According to that system, Christ says to every
Christian: Here, my child, is the Word of God,
and with it I leave you an infallible interpreter,
who will expound for you its hidden meaning and
make clear all its difficulties.
</p>

<p>
Here are the waters of eternal life, but I have
created a channel that will communicate these
waters to you in all their sweetness without sediment
of error.
</p>

<p>
Here is the written Constitution of My Church.
But I have appointed over it a Supreme Tribunal,
in the person of one <q>to whom I have given the
keys of the Kingdom of Heaven,</q> who will preserve
that Constitution inviolate, and will not permit
it to be torn into shreds by the conflicting
opinions of men. And thus my children will be
one, as I and the Father are one.
</p>

</div>

<pb n="136"/><anchor id="Pg136"/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc' level1='Chapter XII. Temporal Power Of The Popes.'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='Chapter XII.'/>
<head type='sub'>Chapter XII.</head>
<head>Temporal Power Of The Popes.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head>I. How The Popes Acquired Temporal Power.</head>

<p>
For the clearer understanding of the origin and
the gradual growth of the Temporal Power of
the Popes, we may divide the history of the
Church into three great epochs.
</p>

<p>
The first embraces the period which elapsed
from the establishment of the Church to the days
of Constantine the Great, in the fourth century;
the second, from Constantine to Charlemagne,
who was crowned Emperor in the year 800; the
third, from Charlemagne to the present time.
</p>

<p>
When St. Peter, the first Pope in the long, unbroken
line of Sovereign Pontiffs, entered Italy
and Rome he did not possess a foot of ground
which he could call his own. He could say with
his Divine Master: <q>The foxes have holes and
the birds of the air nests, but the Son of Man
hath not whereon to lay his head.</q><note place='foot'>Matt.
viii. 20.</note> The Apostle
died as he had lived, a poor man, having nothing
at his death save the affections of a grateful
people.
</p>

<pb n="137"/><anchor id="Pg137"/>

<p>
But, although the Prince of the Apostles owned
nothing that he could call his personal property,
he received from the faithful large donations to
be distributed among the needy. For in the Acts
of the Apostles we are told that <q>neither was anyone
among them (the faithful) needy; for as many
as were owners of lands or houses sold them, and
brought the prices of the things which they sold
and laid them before the feet of the Apostles, and
distribution was made to everyone according as
he had need.</q><note place='foot'>Acts iv.
34, 35.</note> Such was the filial attachment of
the early Christians towards the Pontiffs of the
Church; such was the confidence reposed in their
personal integrity, and in their discretion in dispensing
the charity of the faithful.
</p>

<p>
During the first three hundred years the Pastors
of the Church were generally incapable of
holding real estate in Rome; for Christianity was
yet a proscribed religion, and the faithful were
exposed to the most violent and unrelenting persecutions
that have ever darkened the annals of
history.
</p>

<p>
The Christians of Rome worshiped for the
most part in the catacombs. These catacombs are
subterranean chambers and passages under the
city of Rome. They extend for miles in different
directions, and are visited to this day by thousands
of strangers. Here the primitive Christians
prayed together, here they encouraged one another
to martyrdom, here they died and were
buried; so that these caverns served at the same
time as temples of worship for the living and as
tombs for the dead.
</p>

<p>
At last Constantine the Great brought peace to
the Church. The long night of Pagan persecution
was succeeded by the bright dawn of religious liberty,
<pb n="138"/><anchor id="Pg138"/>
and as our Blessed Savior rose triumphant
from the grave, after having lain there for three
days, so did our early brethren in the faith emerge
from the tombs of the catacombs, after having been
buried, as it were, in the bowels of the earth for
three centuries.
</p>

<p>
Constantine gave to the Roman Church munificent
donations of money and real estate, which
were augmented by additional grants contributed
by subsequent emperors. Hence the patrimony of
the Roman Pontiffs soon became very considerable.
Voltaire himself tells us that the wealth
which the Popes acquired was spent not in satisfying
their own avarice and ambition, but in the
most laudable works of charity and religion. They
expended their patrimony, he says, in sending missionaries
to evangelize Pagan Europe, in giving
hospitality to exiled Bishops at Rome and in feeding
the poor. And I may here add that succeeding
Popes have generously imitated the munificence
of the early Pontiffs.
</p>

<p>
An event occurred in the reign of Constantine
which paved the way for the partial jurisdiction
which the Roman Pontiffs commenced to enjoy
over Rome, and which they continued to exercise
till they obtained full sovereignty in the days of
King Pepin of France.
</p>

<p>
In the year 327 the Emperor Constantine transferred
the seat of empire from Rome to Constantinople,
the present capital of Turkey. The city
was named after Constantine, who founded it. A
subsequent emperor appointed a governor, or
exarch, to rule Italy, who resided in the city of
Ravenna. This new system, as is manifest, did
not work well. The Emperor of Constantinople
referred all matters to his deputy in Ravenna, and
the deputy was more anxious to conciliate the
<pb n="139"/><anchor id="Pg139"/>
Emperor than to satisfy the people of Rome.
Italy and Rome were then in a political condition
analogous to that in which the Irish were placed
for several centuries.
</p>

<p>
Abandoned to itself, Rome became a tempting
prey to those numerous hordes of Barbarians from
the North that then devastated Italy. The city
was successively attacked by the Goths under
Alaric, and by the Vandals under Genseric, and
was threatened by the Huns under Attila. Unable
to obtain assistance from the Emperor in the
East, or the Governor at Ravenna, the citizens of
Rome looked up to the Popes as their only Governors
and protectors, and their only salvation in
the dangers which threatened them. The confidence
which they reposed in the Pontiffs was not
misplaced. The Popes were not only devoted
spiritual Fathers, but firm and valiant civil Governors.
When Attila, who was surnamed <q>the
Scourge of God,</q> approached the city with an
army of 500,000 men, Pope Leo the Great went out
to meet him unattended by troops. His mild eloquence
disarmed the indomitable chieftain and induced
him to retrace his steps. Thus he saved
the city from pillage and the people from destruction.
The same Pope Leo also confronted Genseric,
the leader of the Vandals; and although he
could not this time protect Rome from the plunder
of the soldiers he saved the lives of the citizens
from slaughter. Such acts as these were naturally
calculated to bind the Roman people more strongly
to the Popes and to alienate them from their
nominal rulers.
</p>

<p>
In the early part of the eighth century Leo
Isauricus, one of the successors of Constantine on
the imperial throne, not content with his civil authority,
endeavored, like Henry VIII., to usurp
<pb n="140"/><anchor id="Pg140"/>
spiritual jurisdiction, and, like the same English
monarch, sought to rob the people of their time-honored
sacred traditions. A civil ruler dabbling
in religion is as reprehensible as a clergyman dabbling
in politics. Both render themselves odious
as well as ridiculous. The Emperor commanded
all paintings of our Savior and His saints to be removed
from the churches on the assumption that
such an exhibition was an act of idolatry. Pope
Gregory II. wrote to the Emperor an energetic
remonstrance, reminding him that <q>dogmas of
faith are to be interpreted by the Pontiffs of the
Church and not by emperors,</q> and begging him
to spare the sacred paintings. But the Pope's
remonstrance and entreaties were in vain. This
conduct of the Emperor tended to widen still more
the breach between himself and the Roman people.
</p>

<p>
Soon after an event occurred which abolished
forever the authority of the Byzantine Emperors
in Italy, and established on a sure and lasting
basis the temporal sovereignty of the Popes.
</p>

<p>
In 754 Astolphus, King of the Lombards, invaded
Italy, captured some Italian cities and
threatened to advance on Rome.
</p>

<p>
Pope Stephen III.,<note place='foot'>Sometimes
called Stephen II., as Stephen, his predecessor,
died three days after his election, whose name is omitted in
some calendars.</note> who then ruled the Church,
sent an urgent appeal to the Emperor Constantine
Copronymus, successor of Leo the Isaurian, imploring
him to come to the relief of Rome and his
Italian provinces. The Emperor manifested his
usual apathy and indifference and received the
message with coldness and neglect.
</p>

<p>
In this emergency Stephen, who sees that no
time is to be lost, crosses the Alps in person, approaches
<pb n="141"/><anchor id="Pg141"/>
Pepin, King of France, and begs that
powerful monarch to protect the Italian people,
who were utterly abandoned by those that ought
to be their defenders. The pious King, after paying
his homage to the Pope, sets out for Italy with
his army, defeats the invading Lombards and
places the Pope at the head of the conquered
provinces.
</p>

<p>
Charlemagne, the successor of Pepin, not only
confirms the grant of his father, but increases the
temporal domain of the Pope by donating him
some additional provinces.
</p>

<p>
This small piece of territory the Roman Pontiffs
continued to govern from that time till 1870, with
the exception of brief intervals of foreign usurpation.
And certainly, if ever any Prince merited
the appellation of legitimate sovereign, that title
is eminently deserved by the Bishops of Rome.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head>II. The Validity And Justice Of Their Title.</head>

<p>
There are three titles which render the tenure of
a Prince honest and incontestable, viz., <emph>long possession,
legitimate acquisition</emph> and <emph>a just use of the
original grant confided to him</emph>. The Bishop of
Rome possessed his temporality by all these titles.
</p>

<p>
First&mdash;The temporal dominion of the Pope is
most ancient in point of time. He commenced, as
we have seen, to enjoy full sovereignty about the
middle of the eighth century. The Pope was, consequently,
a temporal ruler for upwards of 1,100
years. The Papal dynasty is, therefore, the oldest
in Europe, and probably in the world. The Pope
was the temporal ruler of Rome four hundred
years before England subjugated Ireland, and
seven hundred before the first European pressed
his foot on the American continent.
</p>

<pb n="142"/><anchor id="Pg142"/>

<p>
Second&mdash;His civil authority was established not
by the sword of conquest, nor the violence of usurpation.
He did not mount the throne upon the
ruins of outraged liberties or violated treaties; but
he was called to rule by the unanimous voice of a
grateful people. Always the devoted spiritual
Father of Rome, he providentially became its civil
defender; and the temporal power he had possessed
already by popular suffrage was ratified
and sanctioned by the sovereign act of the Frankish
monarch. In a word, the ship of state was in
danger of being engulfed beneath the fierce waves
of foreign invasion. The captain, meantime, folded
his arms and abandoned the ship to her fate. The
Pope was called to the helm in the emergency, and
he saved the vessel from shipwreck and the people
from destruction. Hence, even Gibbon, the English
historian, who cannot be suspected of partiality,
has the candor to use the following language in discussing
this subject: <q>Their (the Pope's) temporal
dominion is now confirmed by the reverence of a
thousand years, and their noblest title is the free
choice of a people whom they had redeemed from
slavery.</q>
</p>

<p>
Third&mdash;What is the use or advantage of the temporal
power? This is well worth considering, as
many have erroneous notions on the subject.
</p>

<p>
The object is not to aggrandize or enrich the
Pope. He ascends the Papal chair generally an
old man, when human passion and human ambition,
if any did exist, are on the wane. His personal
expenses do not exceed a few dollars a day.
He eats alone and very abstemiously. He has no
wife, no children to enrich with the spoils of office,
as he is an unmarried man. The Popedom is not
<pb n="143"/><anchor id="Pg143"/>
hereditary, like the sovereignty of England, but
elective, like the office of our President, and the
Holy Father is succeeded by a Pontiff to whom he
was bound by no family ties. What personal motive,
therefore, can he have in desiring temporal
sovereignty? I am sure, indeed, that if the Holy
Father were to consult his own taste and feelings,
he would much rather be free from the trammels
of civil government. But he has higher interests
to subserve. He must vindicate the eternal laws
of justice which have been violated in his own
person.
</p>

<p>
As the Popes were not actuated by a love of
gain in possessing temporal dominion, neither had
they any desire to enlarge their territory, small as
it was. The temporalities of the Pope were not
much larger than the State of Maryland before he
was deprived of them by Victor Emmanuel a few
years ago.
</p>

<p>
And this is the little slice of land which Victor
Emmanuel wrested from the Holy Father. This
is the vineyard which the modern King Achab
wrung from the unoffending Naboth. But the
Pontiff answers, like Naboth of old: <q>The Lord be
merciful to me, and not let me give thee the inheritance
of my fathers.</q><note place='foot'>III. Kings xxi. 3.</note>
</p>

<p>
This is the little ewe-lamb which the modern
David has snatched from Uriah, its legitimate
owner. The royal shepherd of Piedmont had already
seized all the other lambs and sheep of his
neighbors; but he was not satisfied till he added to
his fold the solitary, tender lamb of the Pope. Let
him take care, however, that the prophecy denounced
by Nathan against David fall not upon
himself and his posterity: <q>Why, therefore, hast
thou despised the word of the Lord, to do evil in
<pb n="144"/><anchor id="Pg144"/>
My sight? Therefore the sword shall never depart
from thy house, because thou hast despised
Me. Behold, I will raise up evil against thee out
of thy own house.</q><note place='foot'>II. Kings xii.</note>
</p>

<p>
While the patrimony of the Pope was large
enough to secure his independence, it was too small
to provoke the fear and jealousy of foreign powers.
The authority of the Roman Pontiffs in the
Middle Ages was almost unbounded. Had they
wished then, they could easily have increased their
territory; yet they were content with what Providence
placed originally in their hands.<note place='foot'>I
dare say you could have found, a few years since, some
persons in the United States who entertained a holy fear lest
the Pope should one morning land upon our shores, and take
forcible possession of our country. A venerable clergyman once
informed me that when he went to pay his respects to President
Pierce, who then occupied the White House, his Excellency remarked
to him: <q>I had a visit from a nervous gentleman, who
asked me whether I was making any preparations to resist the
approach of the Pope. I replied that so far I had taken no
steps, but that no doubt I would be prepared to meet the enemy
when he arrived. The man retired more composed, though not
fully satisfied.</q></note>
</p>

<p>
The sole end of the temporal power has been to
secure for the Pope independence and freedom in
the government of the Church. The Holy Father
must be either a sovereign or a subject. There is
no medium. If a subject, he might become either
the pliant creature, if God would so permit, of his
royal master, like the schismatic Patriarch of Constantinople,
who, as Gibbon observed, was <q>a domestic
slave under the eye of his master, at whose
nod he passed from the convent to the throne, and
from the throne to the convent.</q> And, indeed,
the Oriental schismatic Bishops are as subservient
now as they were then to their temporal rulers.
Or, what is far more probable, the Pope might become
a virtual prisoner in his own house, as the
<pb n="145"/><anchor id="Pg145"/>
present illustrious Pontiff is at this moment.
</p>

<p>
The Pope is the representative of Christ on
earth. His office requires him to be in constant
communication with prelates in every country in
the world. Should the kingdom of Italy be embroiled
in a war with any European Power&mdash;with
Germany, for instance&mdash;it would be difficult, if not
impossible, for the Holy Father and the German
Bishops to confer with each other, and religion
would suffer from the interruption of intercourse
between the Head and the members.
</p>

<p>
The interests of Christianity demand that the
Vicar of the Prince of Peace should possess one
spot of territory which would be held inviolable,
so that all nations and peoples could at all times,
in war, as well as in peace, freely correspond with
him. Nothing can be more revolting to our feelings
than that the spiritual government of the
Church should be constantly hampered by the
hostile aggressions of ambitious rulers, an
eventuality always likely to occur so long as the
Pope remains the subject of any earthly potentate.<note place='foot'>Some
of the evils that were predicted to follow from the
occupation of Rome by a foreign power have been too speedily
realized. Already several convents and other ecclesiastical
institutions have been seized and sold, and their inmates sent
adrift. A number of colleges founded and endowed by the
piety of foreign Catholics have been confiscated. Public religious
processions through the streets of Rome have been prohibited.
These and other outrages are perpetrated by a
government which solemnly pledged itself to maintain inviolate
the sovereign rights of the Holy Father when it took
forcible possession of his city in 1870. From the events that
have already transpired, we shall not be surprised to see the
Pope still more seriously hampered by a monarch who has unscrupulously
violated his former guarantees.</note>
</p>

<p>
But we are told that the Roman people, by a
<hi rend='italic'>plebiscitum</hi>, or popular vote, expressed their desire
to be annexed to the Piedmontese Government.
<pb n="146"/><anchor id="Pg146"/>
To this I answer, in the first place, that we
ought to know what importance to attach to elections
held under the shadow of the bayonet. It is
well known that the Roman <hi rend='italic'>plebiscitum</hi> was undertaken
by the authority and guided by the inspiration
of the Italian troops. It is equally notorious
that the numerous stragglers who accompanied
the Italian army to Rome legalized the
gigantic fraud of their master, as well as their own
petty thefts, by voting in favor of annexation.
</p>

<p>
In the second place, the Roman people, even had
they so desired, had no right to transfer, by <emph>their</emph>
suffrage, the Patrimony of St. Peter to Victor Emmanuel.
They could not give what did not belong
to them. The Papal territory was granted to the
Popes in trust, for the use and benefit of the
Church&mdash;that is, for the use and benefit of the
Catholics of Christendom. The Catholic world,
therefore, and not merely a handful of Roman subjects,
must give its consent before such a transfer
can be declared legitimate. Rome is to Catholic
Christendom what Washington is to the United
States. As the citizens of Washington have no
power, without the concurrence of the United
States, to annex their city to Maryland or Virginia,
neither can the citizens of Rome hand over
their city to the Kingdom of Piedmont without the
acquiescence of the faithful dispersed throughout
the world.
</p>

<p>
We protest, therefore, against the occupation of
Rome by foreign troops as a high-handed act of
injustice, and a gross violation of the Commandment,
<q>Thou shalt not steal.</q>
</p>

<p>
We protest against it as a royal outrage, calculated
to shock the public sense of honesty, and to
weaken the sacred right of public and private
property.
</p>

<pb n="147"/><anchor id="Pg147"/>

<p>
We protest against it as an unjustifiable violation
of solemn treaties.
</p>

<p>
We protest, in fine, against the spoliation as an
impious sacrilege, because it is an unholy seizure
of ecclesiastical property, and an attempt, as far
as human agencies can accomplish it, to trammel
and embarrass the free action of the Head of the
Church.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head>III. What The Popes Have Done For Rome.</head>

<p>
Although the temporal power of the Pope is a
subject which concerns the universal Church, no
nation has more reason to lament the loss of the
Holy Father's temporalities than the Italians
themselves, and particularly the inhabitants of
Rome.
</p>

<p>
It is the residence of the Popes in Rome that
has contributed to her material and religious
grandeur. The Pontiffs have made her the Centre
of Christendom, the Queen of religion, the Mistress
of arts and sciences, the Depository of sacred
learning.
</p>

<p>
By their creative and conservative spirit they
have saved the illustrious monuments of the past,
and, side by side with these, they have raised up
Christian temples which surpass those of Pagan
antiquity. In looking today at these old Roman
monuments we know not which to admire more&mdash;the
genius of those who designed and erected them,
or the fostering care of the Popes who have preserved
from destruction the venerable ruins. The
residence of the Popes in Rome has made her
what she is truly called, <q><hi rend='italic'>The Eternal City</hi>.</q>
</p>

<p>
Let the Popes leave Rome forever, and in five
years grass will be growing on its streets.
</p>

<pb n="148"/><anchor id="Pg148"/>

<p>
Such was the case at the return of the Pope, in
1418, from Avignon, which had been the seat of
the Sovereign Pontiffs during the preceding century.
On the Pope's return the city of Rome had
a population of only 17,000<note place='foot'>Memoir of Pope
Sixtus V., by Baron Hübner, Vol. II., ch. 1.</note> and Avignon, which,
during the residence of the Popes in the fourteenth
century contained a population of 100,000,
has now a population of only 36,407 inhabitants.
Such, also, was the case in the beginning of the
present century, when Pius VII. was an exile for
four years from Rome, and a prisoner of the first
Napoleon, in Grenoble, Savona and Fontainebleau.
Grass then grew on the streets of Rome, and the
city lost one-half of its population.
</p>

<p>
Rome has naturally no commercial attractions.
It is only the presence of the Pope that keeps up
her trade. Let the Popes abandon Rome, and her
churches will soon be without worshipers; her
artists without employment. Her glorious monuments
will perish. Science and art and sacred
literature will take their flight and perch upon
some more favored spot. The hundred thousand
and more strangers who annually flock to Rome
from different parts of the world will shake off the
dust from their feet and seek more congenial cities.
</p>

<p>
Let the Popes withdraw from Rome, and it may
become almost as desolate as Jerusalem and Antioch
are today.
</p>

<p>
Peter preached his first sermons in Jerusalem,
but he did not select it as his See; and Jerusalem
is today a Mahometan city, with its sacred places
profaned by the foot of the Mussulman.
</p>

<p>
Peter occupied for a time the city of Antioch as
his first See. But, in the mysterious providence of
God, he abandoned Antioch and repaired to Rome;
and now, little remains of the ancient Antioch of
Peter's day except colossal ruins.
</p>

<pb n="149"/><anchor id="Pg149"/>

<p>
Had the Popes remained in Antioch, Syria would
now very probably be, instead of Europe, the centre
of Christianity and civilization. The immortal
Dome of St. Peter's would, doubtless, overshadow
the banks of the Orontes instead of the Tiber; and
Antioch, not Rome, would be the focus of art,
science, and sacred literature, and would be called
today <q>The Eternal City.</q>
</p>

<p>
Our present<note place='foot'>When these lines
were written, Pius IX. was the reigning Pontiff.
He died February 7, 1878.</note> beloved Pontiff, Pius IX., I need
not inform you, is now treated with indignity in
his own city. In his declining years, as well as in
the early days of his Pontificate, he is made to
drink deep of the chalice of affliction. His name is
dear to us all. To many of us it is a name familiar
from our youth; for thirty-one years have now
elapsed since he first assumed the reins of government;
and it is a noteworthy fact that, since
the days of Peter, no Pope has ever reigned so
long as Pius IX.
</p>

<p>
The Pope in every age, like his Divine Master,
has his period of persecution and his period of
peace. Like Him, he has his days of sorrow and
his days of joy, his days of humiliation and death,
his days of exaltation and glory. Like Jesus
Christ, he is one day greeted with acclamations as
king, and another day crucified by his enemies.
</p>

<p>
But never does the Holy Father exhibit his title
as Vicar of Christ more strikingly than in the
midst of tribulations. If he did not suffer, he
would bear no resemblance to his Divine Model
and Master; and never does he more worthily deserve
the filial homage of his children than when
he is heavily laden with the cross.
</p>

<p>
I envy neither the heart nor the head of those
men who are now gloating with fiendish joy over
<pb n="150"/><anchor id="Pg150"/>
the calamities of the Pope; who are heaping insults
and calumnies on his venerable head, while
he is in the hands of his enemies,<note place='foot'>Some
time ago, my attention was called to a certain excommunication
or <q>curse,</q> then widely circulated by the press of
North Carolina. The <q>curse</q> is attributed to the Holy Father,
and is fulminated against Victor Emmanuel. In this anathema,
<emph>cursing</emph> and <emph>damning</emph> are heaped up in wild confusion. When
this base forgery appeared, an article exposing the falsehood
of the production was published. We fear, however, that many
who read the slanderous charge did not read its refutation.</note> and who are
confidently predicting the downfall of the Papacy,
from the present situation of the Head of the
Church, as if the temporary privation of his
dominions involved their irrevocable loss; or, as if
even the perpetual destruction of the temporal
power involved the destruction of the spiritual supremacy
itself. <q>The Papacy,</q> they say, <q>is
gone. Its glory is vanished. Its sun is set. It is
sunk below the horizon, never to rise again.</q> Ill-boding
prophets, will you never profit by the lessons
of history? Have not numbers of Popes before
Pius IX. been forcibly ejected from their
See, and have they not been reinstated in their
temporal authority? What has happened so often
before may and will happen again.
</p>

<p>
For our part we have every confidence that ere
long the clouds which now overshadow the civil
throne of the Pope will be removed by the breath
of a righteous God, and that his temporal power
will be re-established on a more permanent basis
than ever.
</p>

<p>
But whatever be the fate of the Pope's temporalities,
we have no fears for the spiritual
throne of the Papacy. The Pontiffs have received
their earthly dominion from man, and what man
gives man may take away. But the spiritual supremacy
the Bishops of Rome have from God,
and no man can destroy it. That Divine charter
<pb n="151"/><anchor id="Pg151"/>
of their prerogatives, <q>Thou art Peter, and on
this rock I will build My Church, and the gates of
hell shall not prevail against it,</q><note place='foot'>Matt.
xvi. 18.</note> will ever shine
forth as brightly as the sun, and it is as far as the
sun above the reach of human aggression.
</p>

<p>
The Holy Father may live and die in the catacombs,
as the early Pontiffs did for the first three
centuries. He may be dragged from his See and
perish in exile, like the Martins, the Gregories and
the Piuses. He may wander a penniless pilgrim,
like Peter himself. Rome itself may sink beneath
the Mediterranean; but the chair of Peter will
stand, and Peter will live in his successors.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<pb n="152"/><anchor id="Pg152"/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc' level1='Chapter XIII. The Invocation Of Saints.'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='Chapter XIII.'/>
<head type='sub'>Chapter XIII.</head>
<head>The Invocation Of Saints.</head>

<p>
Christians of most denominations are accustomed
to recite the following article contained
in the Apostles' Creed: <q>I believe in
the communion of Saints.</q> There are many, I
fear, who have these words frequently on their
lips, without an adequate knowledge of the precious
meaning which they convey.
</p>

<p>
The true and obvious sense of the words quoted
from the Creed is, that between the children of
God, whether reigning in heaven or sojourning on
earth, there exists an intercommunion, or spiritual
communication by prayer; and, consequently, that
our friends who have entered into their rest are
mindful of us in their petitions to God.
</p>

<p>
In the exposition of her Creed the Catholic
Church weighs her words in the scales of the
sanctuary with as much precision as a banker
weighs his gold. With regard to the Invocation of
Saints the Church simply declares that it is <q>useful
and salutary</q> to ask their prayers. There
are expressions addressed to the Saints in some
popular books of devotion which, to critical readers,
may seem extravagant. But they are only
the warm language of affection and poetry, to be
regulated by our standard of faith; and notice that
all the prayers of the Church end with the
formula: <q>Through our Lord Jesus Christ,</q> sufficiently
<pb n="153"/><anchor id="Pg153"/>
indicating her belief that Christ is the
Mediator of salvation. A heart tenderly attached
to the Saints will give vent to its feelings in the
language of hyperbole, just as an enthusiastic
lover will call his future bride his adorable queen,
without any intention of worshiping her as a goddess.
This reflection should be borne in mind
while reading such passages.
</p>

<p>
I might easily show, by voluminous quotations
from ecclesiastical writers of the first ages of the
Church, how conformable to the teaching of antiquity
is the Catholic practice of invoking the
intercession of the Saints. But as you, dear
reader, may not be disposed to attach adequate
importance to the writings of the Fathers, I shall
confine myself to the testimony of Holy Scripture.
</p>

<p>
You will readily admit that it is a salutary
custom to ask the prayers of the blessed in heaven,
provided you have no doubt that they can <emph>hear</emph>
your prayers, and that they have the <emph>power</emph> and
the <emph>will</emph> to assist you. Now the Scriptures amply
demonstrate the knowledge, the influence and the
love of the Saints in our regard.
</p>

<p>
First&mdash;It would be a great mistake to suppose
that the Angels and Saints reigning with God see
and hear in the same manner that we see and hear
on earth, or that knowledge is communicated to
them as it is communicated to us. While we are
confined in the prison of the body, we see only with
our eyes and hear with our ears; hence our
faculties of vision and hearing are very limited.
Compared with the heavenly inhabitants, we are
like a man in a darksome cell through which a dim
ray of light penetrates. He observes but few objects,
and these very obscurely. But as soon as
our soul is freed from the body, soaring heavenward
like a bird released from its cage, its vision
<pb n="154"/><anchor id="Pg154"/>
is at once marvelously enlarged. It requires
neither eyes to see nor ears to hear, but beholds
all things in God as in a mirror. <q>We now,</q> says
the Apostle, <q>see through a glass darkly; but then
face to face. Now, I know in part; but then I shall
know even as I am known.</q><note place='foot'>I.
Cor. xiii. 12.</note> In our day we know
what wonderful facility we have in communicating
with our friends at a distance. A message to Berlin
or Rome with the answer, which a century ago
would require sixty days in transmission, can now
be accomplished in sixty minutes.
</p>

<p>
I can hold a conversation with an acquaintance
in San Francisco, three thousand miles away, and
can talk to him as easily and expeditiously as if he
were closeted with me here in Baltimore.
</p>

<p>
Nay more, we can distinctly recognize one another
by the sound of our voice.
</p>

<p>
If a scientist had predicted such events, a hundred
years past, he would be regarded as demented.
And yet he would not be a visionary, but a prophet.
</p>

<p>
Let us not be unwise in measuring Divine power
by our finite reason.
</p>

<p>
If such revelations are made in the natural order,
what may we not expect in the supernatural
world? If science gives us such rapid and easy
means of corresponding with our fellow beings on
foreign shores, what methods may not the God of
Sciences employ to enable us to communicate with
our brethren on the shores of eternity?
</p>

<p>
<q>There are more things in heaven and earth,
Horatio, than are dreamt of in your philosophy.</q>
</p>

<p>
That the spirits of the just in heaven are clearly
conversant with our affairs on earth is manifest
from the following passages of Holy Writ. The
venerable Patriarch Jacob, when on his deathbed,
<pb n="155"/><anchor id="Pg155"/>
prayed thus for his two grandchildren: <q>May
the angel that delivereth me from all evils bless
these boys!</q><note place='foot'>Gen. xlviii.
16.</note> Here we see a holy Patriarch&mdash;one
singularly favored by Almighty God, and enlightened
by many supernatural visions, the father
of Jehovah's chosen people&mdash;asking the angel in
heaven to obtain a blessing for his grandchildren.
And surely we cannot suppose that he would be so
ignorant as to pray to one that could not hear him.
</p>

<p>
The angel Raphael, after having disclosed himself
to Tobias, said to him: <q>When thou didst
pray with tears, and didst bury the dead, and didst
leave thy dinner, I offered thy prayer to the
Lord.</q><note place='foot'>Tobias xii.
12.</note> How could the angel, if he were ignorant
of these petitions, have presented to God the prayers
of Tobias?
</p>

<p>
To pass from the Old to the New Testament, our
Savior declares that <q>there shall be joy before the
angels of God upon one sinner doing
penance.</q><note place='foot'>Luke xv. 10.</note>
Then the angels are glad whenever you repent of
your sins. Now, what is repentance? It is a change
of heart. It is an interior operation of the will.
The saints, therefore, are acquainted&mdash;we know
not how&mdash;not only with your actions and words,
but even with your very thoughts.
</p>

<p>
And when St. Paul says that <q>we are made a
spectacle to the world, to angels, and to
men,</q><note place='foot'>I. Cor. iv. 9.</note>
what does he mean, unless that as our actions are
seen by men even so they are visible to the angels
in heaven?
</p>

<p>
The examples I have quoted refer, it is true, to
the angels. But our Lord declares that the saints
in heaven shall be like the angelic spirits, by possessing
the same knowledge, enjoying the same
happiness.<note place='foot'>Matt. xxii. 30.</note>
</p>

<pb n="156"/><anchor id="Pg156"/>

<p>
We read in the Gospel that Dives, while suffering
in the place of the reprobates, earnestly besought
Abraham to cool his burning thirst. And
Abraham, in his abode of rest after death, was
able to listen and reply to him. Now, if communication
could exist between the souls of the just and
of the reprobate, how much easier is it to suppose
that interchange of thought can exist between the
saints in heaven and their brethren on earth?
</p>

<p>
These few instances are sufficient to convince
you that the spirits in heaven hear our prayers.
</p>

<p>
Second&mdash;We have, also, abundant testimony
from Scripture to show that the saints assist us
by their prayers. Almighty God threatened the
inhabitants of Sodom and Gomorrha with utter destruction
on account of their crimes and abominations.
Abraham interposes in their behalf and, in
response to his prayer, God consents to spare those
cities if only ten just men are found therein. Here
the avenging hand of God is suspended and the fire
of His wrath withheld, through the efficacy of the
prayers of a single man.<note place='foot'>Gen. xxviii.</note>
</p>

<p>
We read in the Book of Exodus that when the
Amalekites were about to wage war on the children
of Israel Moses, the great servant and Prophet
of the Lord, went upon a mountain to pray for the
success of his people; and the Scriptures inform
us that whenever Moses raised his hands in prayer
the Israelites were victorious, but when he ceased
to pray Amalek conquered. Could the power of
intercessory prayer be manifested in a more striking
manner? The silent prayer of Moses on the
mountain was more formidable to the Amalekites
than the sword of Josue and his armed hosts fighting
in the valley.<note place='foot'>Exod. xvii.</note>
</p>

<pb n="157"/><anchor id="Pg157"/>

<p>
When the same Hebrew people were banished
from their native country and carried into exile in
Babylon, so great was their confidence in the prayers
of their brethren in Jerusalem that they sent
them the following message, together with a sum
of money, that sacrifice might be offered up for
them in the holy city: <q>Pray ye for us to the Lord
our God, for we have sinned against the Lord our
God.</q><note place='foot'>Baruch i. 13.</note>
</p>

<p>
When the friends of Job had excited the indignation
of the Almighty in consequence of their
vain speech, God, instead of directly granting them
the pardon which they sought, commanded them to
invoke the intercession of Job: <q>Go,</q> He says,
<q>to My servant Job and offer for yourselves a
holocaust, and My servant Job will pray for you
and his face will I accept.</q><note place='foot'>Job
xlii.</note> Nor did they appeal
to Job in vain; for, <q>the Lord was turned at the
penance of Job when he prayed for his friends.</q><note place='foot'>Ibid.</note>
In this instance we not only see the value of intercessory
prayer, but we find God sanctioning it by
His own authority.
</p>

<p>
But of all the sacred writers there is none that
reposes greater confidence in the prayers of his
brethren than St. Paul, although no one had a better
knowledge than he of the infinite merits of our
Savior's Passion, and no one could have more endeared
himself to God by his personal labors. In
his Epistles St. Paul repeatedly asks for himself
the prayers of his disciples. If he wishes to be
delivered from the hands of the unbelievers of
Judea, and his ministry to be successful in Jerusalem,
he asks the Romans to obtain these favors for
him. If he desires the grace of preaching with
profit the Gospel to the Gentiles, he invokes the
intercession of the Ephesians.
</p>

<pb n="158"/><anchor id="Pg158"/>

<p>
Nay, is it not a common practice among ourselves,
and even among our dissenting brethren, to
ask the prayers of one another? When a father
is about to leave his house on a long journey the
instinct of piety prompts him to say to his wife
and children: <q>Remember me in your prayers.</q>
</p>

<p>
Now I ask you, if our friends, though sinners,
can aid us by their prayers, why cannot our
friends, the saints of God, be able to assist us
also? If Abraham and Moses and Job exercised
so much influence with the Almighty while they
lived in the flesh, is their power with God diminished
now that they reign with Him in heaven?
</p>

<p>
We are moved by the children of Israel sending
their pious petitions to their brethren in Jerusalem.
They recalled to mind, no doubt, what the
Lord said to Solomon after he had completed the
temple: <q>My eyes shall be open and My ears attentive
to the prayer of him that shall pray in this
place.</q><note place='foot'>II. Paralip. vii.
15.</note> If the supplications of those that prayed
in the earthly Jerusalem were so efficacious, what
will God refuse to those who pray to Him face to
face in the heavenly Jerusalem?
</p>

<p>
Third&mdash;But you will ask, are the saints in heaven
so interested in our welfare as to be mindful of us
in their prayers? Or, are they so much absorbed
in the contemplation of God, and in the enjoyment
of celestial bliss, as to be altogether regardless of
their friends on earth? Far from us the suspicion
that the saints reigning with God ever forget us.
In heaven, charity is triumphant. And how can
the saints have love, and yet be unmindful of their
brethren on earth? If they have one desire greater
than another, it is to see us one day wearing the
crowns that await us in heaven. If they were capable
of experiencing sorrow, their grief would
<pb n="159"/><anchor id="Pg159"/>
spring from the consideration that we do not always
walk in their footsteps here, so as to make
sure our election to eternal glory hereafter.
</p>

<p>
The Hebrew people believed, like us, that the
saints after death were occupied in praying for us.
We read in the Book of Maccabees that Judas
Maccabeus, the night before he engaged in battle
with the army of the impious Nicanor, had a
supernatural dream, or vision, in which he beheld
Onias, the High-Priest, and the prophet Jeremiah,
both of whom had been long dead. Onias appeared
to him with outstretched arms, praying for
the people of God. Pointing to Jeremiah, he said
to Judas Maccabeus: <q>This is a lover of his
brethren and the people of Israel. This is he that
prayeth much for the people and for all the holy
city, Jeremiah, the Prophet of
God.</q><note place='foot'>II. Mac. xv. 14.</note> Then
Jeremiah, as is related in the sequel of the vision,
handed a sword to Judas, with which the prophet
predicted that Judas would conquer his enemies.
The soldiers, animated by the relation of Judas,
fought with invincible courage and overcame the
enemy. The Book of Maccabees, though not admitted
by our dissenting brethren to be inspired,
must, at least, be acknowledged by them to be a
faithful historical record. It is manifest, therefore,
from this narrative that the Hebrew people
believed that the saints in heaven pray for their
brethren on earth.
</p>

<p>
St. John in his Revelation describes the Saints
before the throne of God praying for their earthly
brethren: <q>The four and twenty ancients fell down
before the Lamb, having every one of them harps
and golden vials full of odors, which are the prayers
of the saints.</q><note place='foot'>Revel. v. 8.</note>
</p>

<pb n="160"/><anchor id="Pg160"/>

<p>
The prophet Zachariah records a prayer that
was offered by the angel for the people of God,
and the favorable answer which came from heaven:
<q>How long, O Lord, wilt Thou not have mercy on
Jerusalem, and on the cities of Juda, with which
Thou hast been angry?... And the Lord answered
the angel ... good words, comfortable
words.</q><note place='foot'>Zach. i. 12, 13.</note>
</p>

<p>
Nor can we be surprised to learn that the angels
labor for our salvation, since we are told by St.
Peter that <q>the devil goeth about like a roaring
lion, seeking whom he may devour;</q> for, if hate
impels the demons to ruin us, surely love must
inspire the angels to help us in securing the crown
of glory. And if the angels, though of a different
nature from ours, are so mindful of us, how much
more interest do the saints manifest in our welfare,
who are bone of our bone and flesh of our
flesh?
</p>

<p>
To ask the prayers of our brethren in heaven is
not only conformable to Holy Scripture, but is
prompted by the instincts of our nature. The
Catholic doctrine of the Communion of Saints robs
death of its terrors, while the Reformers of the
sixteenth century, in denying the Communion of
Saints, not only inflicted a deadly wound on the
Creed, but also severed the tenderest chords of
the human heart. They broke asunder the holy
ties that unite earth with heaven&mdash;the soul in the
flesh with the soul released from the flesh. If my
brother leaves me to cross the seas I believe that
he continues to pray for me. And when he crosses
the narrow sea of death and lands on the shores
of eternity, why should he not pray for me still?
What does death destroy? The body. The soul
still lives and moves and has its being. It thinks
<pb n="161"/><anchor id="Pg161"/>
and wills and remembers and loves. The dross of
sin and selfishness and hatred are burned by the
salutary fires of contrition, and nothing remains
but the pure gold of charity.
</p>

<p>
O far be from us the dreary thought that death
cuts off our friends entirely from us! Far be from
us the heartless creed which declares a perpetual
divorce between us and the just in heaven! Do not
imagine when you lose a father or mother, a tender
sister or brother, who die in the peace of Christ,
that they are forgetful of you. The love they bore
you on earth is purified and intensified in heaven.
Or if your innocent child, regenerated in the waters
of baptism, is snatched from you by death, be assured
that, though separated from you in body, that
child is with you in spirit and is repaying you a
thousand-fold for the natural life it received from
you. Be convinced that the golden link of prayer
binds you to that angelic infant, and that it is continually
offering its fervent petitions at the throne
of God for you, that you may both be reunited in
heaven. But I hear men cry out with Pharisaical
assurance, <q>You dishonor God, sir, in praying to
the saints. You make void the mediatorship of
Jesus Christ. You put the creature above the Creator.</q>
How utterly groundless is this objection! We
do not dishonor God in praying to the saints. We
should, indeed, dishonor Him if we consulted the
saints <emph>independently</emph> of God. But such is not our
practice. The Catholic Church teaches, on the contrary,
that God alone is the Giver of all good gifts;
that He is the Source of all blessings, the Fountain
of all goodness. She teaches that whatever happiness
or glory or <emph>influence</emph> the saints possess, all
comes from God. As the moon borrows her light
from the sun, so do the blessed borrow their light
from Jesus, <q>the Sun of Justice, the one Mediator
<pb n="162"/><anchor id="Pg162"/>
(of redemption) of God and
men.</q><note place='foot'>I. Tim. ii. 5.</note> Hence,
when we address the saints, we beg them to pray
for us through the merits of Jesus Christ, while we
ask Jesus to help up through His own merits.
</p>

<p>
But what is the use of praying to the saints, since
God can hear us. If it is vain and useless to pray
to the saints because God can hear us, then Jacob
was wrong in praying to the angel; the friends of
Job were wrong in asking him to pray for them,
though God commanded them to invoke Job's intercession;
the Jews exiled in Babylon were wrong
in asking their brethren in Jerusalem to pray for
them; St. Paul was wrong in beseeching his friends
to pray for him; then we are all wrong in praying
for each other. You deem it useful and pious to ask
your pastor to pray for you. Is it not, at least,
equally useful for me to invoke the prayers of St.
Paul, since I am convinced that he can hear me?
</p>

<p>
God forbid that our supplications to our Father
in heaven should diminish in proportion as our
prayers to the Saints increase; for, after all, we
must remember that, while the Church declares it
necessary for salvation to pray to God, she merely
asserts that it is <q>good and useful to invoke the
saints.</q><note place='foot'>Council of Trent,
Sess. xxv.</note> To ask the prayers of the saints, far from
being useless, is most profitable. By invoking their
intercession, instead of one we have many praying
for us. To our own tepid petitions we unite the fervent
supplications of the blessed and <q>the Lord
will hear the prayers of the just.</q><note place='foot'>Prov.
xv. 20.</note> To the petitions
of us, poor pilgrims in this vale of tears, are
united those of the citizens of heaven. We ask
them to pray to their God and to our God, to their
Father and to our Father, that we may one day
share their delights in that blessed country in company
with our common Redeemer, Jesus Christ,
with whom to live is to reign.
</p>

</div>

<pb n="163"/><anchor id="Pg163"/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc' level1='Chapter XIV. The Blessed Virgin Mary.'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='Chapter XIV.'/>
<head type='sub'>Chapter XIV.</head>
<head>Is It Lawful To Honor The Blessed Virgin Mary As A Saint,
To Invoke Her As An Intercessor, And To Imitate Her As A Model.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head>I. Is It Lawful To Honor Her?</head>

<p>
The sincere adorers and lovers of our Lord
Jesus Christ look with reverence on every
object with which He was associated, and
they conceive an affection for every person that
was near and dear to Him on earth. The closer
the intimacy of those persons with our Savior,
the holier do they appear in our estimation, just
as those planets which revolve the nearest around
the sun partake most of its light and heat.
</p>

<p>
There is something hallowed to the eye of the
Christian in the very soil of Judea, because it was
pressed by the footprints of our Blessed Redeemer.
With what reverent steps we would enter
the cave of Bethlehem because <emph>there</emph> was born
the Savior of the world. With what religious demeanor
we would tread the streets of Nazareth
when we remembered that <emph>there</emph> were spent the
days of His boyhood. What profound religious
awe would fill our hearts on ascending Mount
Calvary, where He paid by his blood the ransom
of our souls.
</p>

<p>
But if the <emph>lifeless</emph> soil claims so much reverence,
<pb n="164"/><anchor id="Pg164"/>
how much more veneration would be enkindled in
our hearts for the <emph>living</emph> persons who were the
friends and associates of our Savior on earth!
We know that He exercised a certain salutary and
magnetic influence on those whom He approached.
<q>All the multitude sought to touch Him, for virtue
went out from Him and healed all,</q><note place='foot'>Luke
vi. 19.</note> as happened
to the woman who had been troubled with an issue
of blood.<note place='foot'>Matt. ix. 20.</note>
</p>

<p>
We would seem, indeed, to draw near to Jesus,
if we had the happiness of only conversing with
the Samaritan woman, or of eating at the table of
Zaccheus, or of being entertained by Nicodemus.
But if we were admitted into the inner circle of
His friends&mdash;of Lazarus, Mary and Martha, for
instance&mdash;the Baptist or the Apostles, we would
be conscious that in their company we were drawing
still nearer to Jesus and imbibing somewhat
of that spirit which they must have largely received
from their familiar relations with Him.
</p>

<p>
Now, if the land of Judea is looked upon as
hallowed ground because Jesus dwelt there; if
the Apostles were considered as models of holiness
because they were the chosen companions and
pupils of our Lord in His latter years, how peerless
must have been the sanctity of Mary, who
gave Him birth, whose breast was His pillow, who
nursed and clothed Him in infancy, who guided
His early steps, who accompanied Him in His
exile to Egypt and back, who abode with Him
from infancy to boyhood, from boyhood to manhood,
who during all that time listened to the
words of wisdom which fell from His lips, who
was the first to embrace Him at His birth,
and the last to receive His dying breath on Calvary.
This sentiment is so natural to us that
<pb n="165"/><anchor id="Pg165"/>
we find it bursting forth spontaneously from the
lips of the woman of the Gospel, who, hearing the
words of Jesus full of wisdom and sanctity, lifted
up her voice and said to Him: <q>Blessed is the
womb that bore Thee and the paps that gave
Thee suck.</q>
</p>

<p>
It is in accordance with the economy of Divine
Providence that, whenever God designs any person
for some important work, He bestows on that
person the graces and dispositions necessary for
faithfully discharging it.
</p>

<p>
When Moses was called by heaven to be the
leader of the Hebrew people he hesitated to assume
the formidable office on the plea of <q>impediment
and slowness of tongue.</q> But Jehovah reassured
him by promising to qualify him for the
sublime functions assigned to him: <q>I will be
in thy mouth, and I will teach thee what thou
shalt speak.</q><note place='foot'>Exod. iv. 12.</note>
</p>

<p>
The Prophet Jeremiah was sanctified from his
very birth because he was destined to be the herald
of God's law to the children of Israel: <q>Before
I formed thee in the bowels of thy mother I knew
thee, and before thou camest forth out of the
womb I sanctified thee.</q><note place='foot'>Jer. i. 5.</note>
</p>

<p>
<q>Elizabeth was filled with the Holy
Ghost,</q><note place='foot'>Luke i. 41.</note>
that she might be worthy to be the hostess of our
Lord during the three months that Mary dwelt
under her roof.
</p>

<p>
John the Baptist was <q>filled with the Holy
Ghost even from his mother's womb.</q><note place='foot'>Ibid.
i. 15.</note> <q>He was
a burning and a shining light</q><note place='foot'>John
v. 35.</note> because he was
chosen to prepare the way of the Lord.
</p>

<p>
The Apostles received the plenitude of grace;
they were endowed with the gift of tongue and
<pb n="166"/><anchor id="Pg166"/>
other privileges<note place='foot'>Acts
ii.</note> before they commenced the
work of the ministry. Hence St. Paul says: <q>Our
sufficiency is from God, who hath made us <emph>fit</emph> ministers
of the New Testament.</q><note place='foot'>II Cor. iii. 6.</note>
</p>

<p>
Now of all who have participated in the ministry
of the Redemption there is none who filled
any position so exalted, so sacred, as is the incommunicable
office of Mother of Jesus; and there
is no one, consequently, that <emph>needed</emph> so high a degree
of holiness as she did.
</p>

<p>
For, if God thus sanctified His Prophets and
Apostles as being destined to be the bearers of
the Word of life, how much more sanctified must
Mary have been, who was to bear the Lord and
<q>Author of life.</q><note place='foot'>Acts
iii. 15.</note> If John was so holy because
he was chosen as the pioneer to prepare the way
of the Lord, how much more holy was she who
ushered Him into the world. If holiness became
John's mother, surely a greater holiness became
the mother of John's Master. If God said to His
Priests of old: <q>Be ye clean, you that carry the
vessels of the Lord;</q><note place='foot'>Isaiah
iii. 11.</note> nay, if the vessels themselves
used in the divine service and churches are
set apart by special consecration, we cannot conceive
Mary to have been ever profaned by sin, who
was the chosen vessel of election, even the Mother
of God.
</p>

<p>
When we call the Blessed Virgin the Mother of
God, we assert our belief in two things: First&mdash;That
her Son, Jesus Christ, is true man, else she
were not a <emph>mother</emph>. Second&mdash;That He is true God,
else she were not the <emph>Mother of God</emph>. In other
words, we affirm that the Second Person of the
Blessed Trinity, the Word of God, who in His
divine nature is from all eternity begotten of the
<pb n="167"/><anchor id="Pg167"/>
Father, consubstantial with Him, was in the fulness
of time again begotten, by being born of the
Virgin, thus taking to Himself, from her maternal
womb, a human nature of the same substance with
hers.
</p>

<p>
But it may be said the Blessed Virgin is not
the Mother of the Divinity. She had not, and she
could not have, any part in the generation of the
Word of God, for that generation is eternal; her
maternity is temporal. He is her Creator; she
is His creature. Style her, if you will, the Mother
of the man Jesus or even of the human nature of
the Son of God, but not the Mother of God.
</p>

<p>
I shall answer this objection by putting a question.
Did the mother who bore us have any part
in the production of our <emph>soul</emph>? Was not this
nobler part of our being the work of God alone?
And yet who would for a moment dream of saying
<q>the mother of my body,</q> and not <q><emph>my</emph>
mother?</q>
</p>

<p>
The comparison teaches us that the terms parent
and child, mother and son, refer to the persons
and not to the parts or elements of which the persons
are composed. Hence no one says: <q>The
mother of my <emph>body</emph>,</q> <q>the mother of my <emph>soul</emph>;</q>
but in all propriety <q>my mother,</q> the mother of
me who live and breathe, think and act, <emph>one</emph> in my
personality, though uniting in it a soul directly
created by God, and a material body directly derived
from the maternal womb. In like manner,
as far as the sublime mystery of the Incarnation
can be reflected in the natural order, the Blessed
Virgin, under the overshadowing of the Holy
Ghost, by communicating to the Second Person of
the Adorable Trinity, as mothers do, a true
human nature of the same substance with her
own, is thereby really and truly His Mother.
</p>

<pb n="168"/><anchor id="Pg168"/>

<p>
It is in this sense that the title of <hi rend='italic'>Mother of
God</hi>, denied by Nestorius, was vindicated to her
by the General Council of Ephesus, in 431; in
this sense, and in no other, has the Church called
her by that title.
</p>

<p>
Hence, by immediate and necessary consequence,
follow her surpassing dignity and excellence, and
her special relationship and affinity, not only with
her Divine Son, but also with the Father and
the Holy Ghost.
</p>

<p>
Mary, as Wordsworth beautifully expressed it,
united in her person <q>a mother's love with maiden
purity.</q> The Church teaches us that she was always
a Virgin&mdash;a Virgin before her espousals,
during her married life and after her spouse's
death. <q>The Angel Gabriel was sent from God ...
to a Virgin espoused to a man whose name
was Joseph, ... and the Virgin's name was
Mary.</q><note place='foot'>Luke i. 26, 27.</note>
</p>

<p>
That she remained a Virgin till after the birth
of Jesus is expressly stated in the Gospel.<note place='foot'>Matt. i. 25.</note> It
is not less certain that she continued in the same
state during the remainder of her days; for in
the Apostles' and the Nicene Creed she is called
a Virgin, and that epithet cannot be restricted to
the time of our Saviour's birth. It must be referred
to her whole life, inasmuch as both creeds
were compiled long after she had passed away.
</p>

<p>
The Canon of the Mass, which is very probably
of Apostolic antiquity, speaks of her as the <q>glorious
<emph>ever Virgin</emph>,</q> and in this sentiment all Catholic
tradition concurs.
</p>

<p>
There is a propriety which suggests itself to
every Christian in Mary's remaining a Virgin
after the birth of Jesus, for, as Bishop Bull of
the Protestant Episcopal Church of England remarks,
<pb n="169"/><anchor id="Pg169"/>
<q>It cannot with decency be imagined that
the most holy vessel which was once consecrated
to be a receptacle of the Deity should be afterwards
desecrated and profaned by human use.</q>
The learned Grotius, Calvin and other eminent
Protestant writers hold the same view.
</p>

<p>
The doctrine of the perpetual virginity of Mary
is now combated by Protestants, as it was in the
early days of the Church by Helvidius and Jovinian,
on the following grounds:
</p>

<p>
First&mdash;The Evangelist says that <q>Joseph took
unto him his wife, and he knew her not <emph>till</emph> she
brought forth her first-born son.</q><note place='foot'>Matt.
i. 25.</note> This sentence
suggests to dissenters that other children
besides Jesus were born to Mary. But the qualifying
word <emph>till</emph> by no means implies that the chaste
union which had subsisted between Mary and
Joseph up to the birth of our Lord was subsequently
altered. The Protestant Hooker justly
complains of the early heretics as having <q>abused
greatly these words of Matthew, gathering against
the honor of the Blessed Virgin, that a thing denied
with special circumstance doth import an opposite
affirmation when once that circumstance is
expired.</q><note place='foot'>Book V., ch.
xlv.</note> To express Hooker's idea in plainer
words, when a thing is said not to have occurred
until another event had happened, it does not
necessarily follow that it did occur after that
event took place.
</p>

<p>
The Scripture says that the raven went forth
from the ark, <q>and did not return <emph>till</emph> the waters
were dried up upon the earth</q><note place='foot'>Gen.
viii. 7.</note>&mdash;that is, it never
returned. <q>Samuel saw Saul no more <emph>till</emph> the
day of his death.</q><note place='foot'>Kings xv.
35.</note> He did not, of course, see
him after death. <q>The Lord said to my Lord:
<pb n="170"/><anchor id="Pg170"/>
Sit thou at my right hand <emph>until</emph> I make thy enemies
thy footstool.</q><note place='foot'>Ps.
cix.</note> These words apply to our Savior,
who did not cease to sit at the right of God
after His enemies were subdued.
</p>

<p>
Second&mdash;But Jesus is called Mary's <emph>first-born</emph>
Son, and does not a first-born always imply the
subsequent birth of other children to the same
mother? By no means; for the name of first-born
was given to the first son of every Jewish mother,
whether other children followed or not. We find
this epithet applied to Machir, for instance, who
was the only son of Manasses.<note place='foot'>Josue xvii. 1.</note>
</p>

<p>
Third&mdash;But is not mention frequently made of
the brethren of Jesus?<note place='foot'>Matt. xii.
46; xiii. 55, 56.</note> Fortunately the Gospels
themselves will enable us to trace the maternity
of those who are called His brothers, not to the
Blessed Virgin, but to another Mary. St. Matthew
mentions, by name, James and Joseph among
the brethren of Jesus;<note place='foot'>Ibid.</note>
and the same Evangelist
and also St. Mark tell us that among those who
were present at the Crucifixion were Mary Magdalen
and Mary the mother of James and Joseph.<note place='foot'>Matt xxvii.; Mark xv.</note>
And St. John, who narrates with more detail the
circumstances of the Crucifixion, informs us who
this second Mary was, for he says that there
stood by the cross of Jesus His mother and His
Mother's sister, Mary of Cleophas, and Mary
Magdalen.<note place='foot'>John xix.
25.</note> There is no doubt that Mary of Cleophas
is identical with Mary, who is called by Matthew
and Mark the mother of James and Joseph.
And as Mary of Cleophas was the kinswoman of
the Blessed Virgin, James and Joseph are called
the brothers of Jesus, in conformity with the Hebrew
practice of giving that appellation to cousins
<pb n="171"/><anchor id="Pg171"/>
or near relations. Abraham, for instance, was
the uncle of Lot, yet he calls him brother.<note place='foot'>Gen. xiii. 8.</note>
</p>

<p>
Mary is exalted above all other women, not only
because she united <q>a mother's love with maiden
purity,</q> but also because she was conceived without
original sin. The dogma of the Immaculate
Conception is thus expressed by the Church: <q>We
define that the Blessed Virgin Mary in the first
moment of her conception, by the singular grace
and privilege of Almighty God, in virtue of the
merits of Jesus Christ, the Savior of the human
race, was preserved free from every stain of
original sin.</q><note place='foot'>Bulla Dogmat. Pii Papæ IX.</note>
</p>

<p>
Unlike the rest of the children of Adam, the soul
of Mary was never subject to sin, even in the first
moment of its infusion into the body. She alone
was exempt from the original taint. This immunity
of Mary from original sin is exclusively
due to the merits of Christ, as the Church expressly
declares. She needed a Redeemer as well
as the rest of the human race and therefore was
<q>redeemed, but in a more sublime manner.</q><note place='foot'>Ibid.</note>
Mary is as much indebted to the precious blood
of Jesus for having been <emph>preserved</emph> as we are for
having been <emph>cleansed</emph> from original sin.
</p>

<p>
Although the Immaculate Conception was not
formulated into a dogma of faith till 1854, it is
at least implied in Holy Scripture. It is in strict
harmony with the place which Mary holds in the
economy of Redemption, and has virtually received
the pious assent of the faithful from the
earliest days of the Church.
</p>

<p>
In Genesis we read: <q>I will put enmities between
thee and the woman, and thy seed and her
seed; she shall crush thy head.</q><note place='foot'>Gen.
iii. 15.</note> All Catholic
<pb n="172"/><anchor id="Pg172"/>
commentators, ancient and modern, recognize in
the Seed, the Woman and the serpent types of our
Savior, of Mary and the devil. God here declares
that the enmity of the Seed and that of the Woman
toward the tempter were to be identical. Now the
enmity of Christ, or the Seed, toward the evil one
was absolute and perpetual. Therefore the enmity
of Mary, or the Woman, toward the devil
never admitted of any momentary reconciliation
which would have existed if she were ever subject
to original sin.
</p>

<p>
It is worthy of note that as three characters
appear on the scene of our fall&mdash;Adam, Eve and
the rebellious Angel&mdash;so three corresponding personages
figure in our redemption&mdash;Jesus Christ,
who is the second Adam;<note place='foot'>I. Cor.
xv. 45.</note> Mary, the second Eve,
and the Archangel Gabriel. The second Adam was
immeasurably superior to the first, Gabriel was
superior to the fallen Angel, and hence we are
warranted by analogy to conclude that Mary was
superior to Eve. But if she had been created in
original sin, instead of being superior, she would
be inferior to Eve, who was certainly created immaculate.
We cannot conceive that the mother of
Cain was created superior to the mother of Jesus.
It would have been unworthy of a God of infinite
purity to have been born of a woman that was
even for an instant under the dominion of Satan.
</p>

<p>
The liturgies of the Church, being the established
formularies of her public worship, are
among the most authoritative documents that can
be adduced in favor of any religious practice.
</p>

<p>
In the liturgy ascribed to St. James, Mary is
commemorated as <q>our most holy, immaculate and
most glorious Lady, Mother of God and ever Virgin
Mary.</q><note place='foot'>Bibliotheca Max. Patrum, t. 2, p. 3.</note>
</p>

<pb n="173"/><anchor id="Pg173"/>

<p>
In the Maronite Ritual she is invoked as <q>our
holy, praiseworthy and immaculate Lady.</q><note place='foot'>De
sac. ordinat., p. 313.</note>
</p>

<p>
In the Alexandrian liturgy of St. Basil, she is
addressed as <q>most holy, most glorious, immaculate.</q><note place='foot'>Renaudot.
Lit. Orient.</note>
</p>

<p>
The Feast of Mary's Conception commenced to
be celebrated in the East in the fifth, and in the
West in the seventh centuries. It was not introduced
into Rome till probably towards the end
of the fourteenth century. Though Rome is always
the first that is called on to sanction a new
festival, she is often the last to take part in it.
She is the first that is expected to give the key-note,
but frequently the last to join in the festive
song. While she is silent, the notes are faint and
uncertain; when her voice joins in the chant, the
song of praise becomes constant and universal.
</p>

<p>
It is scarcely necessary for me to add that the
introduction of the festival of the Conception after
the lapse of so many centuries from the foundation
of Christianity no more implies a novelty of
doctrine than the erection of a monument in 1875
to Arminius, the German hero who flourished in
the first century, would be an evidence of his recent
exploits. The Feast of the Blessed Trinity
was not introduced till the fifth century, though
it commemorates a fundamental mystery of the
Christian religion.
</p>

<p>
It is interesting to us to know that the Immaculate
Conception of Mary has been interwoven in
the earliest history of our own country. The ship
that first bore Columbus to America was named
Mary of the Conception. This celebrated navigator
gave the same name to the second island
which he discovered. The first chapel erected in
Quebec, when that city was founded in the early
<pb n="174"/><anchor id="Pg174"/>
part of the seventeenth century was dedicated to
God under the invocation of Mary Immaculate.
</p>

<p>
In view of these three great prerogatives of
Mary&mdash;her divine maternity, her perpetual virginity
and her Immaculate Conception&mdash;we are
prepared to find her blessedness often and expressly
declared in Holy Scripture.
</p>

<p>
The Archangel Gabriel is sent to her from
heaven to announce to her the happy tidings that
she was destined to be the mother of the world's
Redeemer. No greater favor was ever before or
since conferred on woman, whether we consider the
dignity of the messenger, or the momentous character
of the message, or the terms of respect in
which it is conveyed.
</p>

<p>
<q>The Angel Gabriel was sent from God into a
city of Galilee called Nazareth to a virgin ... and
the virgin's name was Mary. And the Angel being
come in said unto her: Hail, full of grace, the Lord
is with thee; blessed art thou among women. Who,
having heard, was troubled at his saying and
thought with herself what manner of salutation
this should be. And the Angel said to her: Fear
not, Mary, for thou hast found grace with God.
Behold, thou shalt conceive in thy womb, and shalt
bring forth a son, and thou shalt call his name
Jesus.... The Holy Ghost shall come upon thee,
and the power of the most high shall overshadow
thee, and therefore, also, the Holy which shall be
born of thee shall be called the Son of
God.</q><note place='foot'>Luke i. 26-35.</note> The
Almighty does not send to Mary, a prophet or
priest, or any other earthly ambassador, nor even
one of the lower choirs of angels, but He commissions
an Archangel to confer with her.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'><q>Hail full of grace!</q></hi> Gabriel does not congratulate
her on her personal charms, though she is the
fairest daughter of Israel. He does not praise her
<pb n="175"/><anchor id="Pg175"/>
for her exalted ancestry, though she is descended
from the Kings of Juda. But he commends her
because she is the chosen child of benediction. He
admires the hidden virtues of her soul, brighter
than the sun, fairer than the moon, purer than
angels, he sees before him,
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<q>Our tainted nature's solitary boast,</q>
</quote>

<p>
one that alone escaped the taint of Adam's disobedience.
</p>

<p>
As the precious diamond reflects various colors
according as it is exposed to the sun's rays, so did
the soul of Mary, from the moment that the <q>Sun
of Justice</q> shone upon her, exhibit every grace
that was prompted by the occasion.
</p>

<p>
St. Stephen and the Apostles were also said to
be full of the Spirit of God. By this, however, we
are not to understand that the same measure of
grace was imparted to them which was given to
Mary. On each one it is bestowed according to his
merits and needs. <q>One is the glory of the sun,
another the glory of the moon, and another the
glory of the stars, for star differeth from star in
glory;</q><note place='foot'>I. Cor. xv.
41.</note> and as Mary's office of Mother of God
immeasurably surpassed in dignity that of the
proto-martyr and of the Apostles, so did her grace
superabound over theirs.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'><q>The Lord is with thee.</q></hi> <q>He exists in His
creatures in different ways; in those that are endowed
with reason in one way, in irrational creatures
in another. His irrational creatures have no
means of apprehending or possessing Him. All
rational creatures may indeed apprehend Him
by knowledge, but only the good by love. Only
in the good does He so exist as to be with them
as well as in them; with them by a certain harmony
and agreement of will, and in this way God
<pb n="176"/><anchor id="Pg176"/>
is with all His Saints. But He is with Mary in
a yet more special manner, for in her there was so
great an agreement and union with God that not
her will only, but her very flesh was to be united to
him.</q><note place='foot'>St. Bernard.</note>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'><q>Blessed art Thou among women.</q></hi> The same
expression is applied to two other women in the
Holy Scripture&mdash;viz., to Jahel and Judith. The
former was called blessed after she had slain
Sisara,<note place='foot'>Judges, v.</note>
and the latter after she had slain Holofernes,<note place='foot'>Judith, xiii.</note>
both of whom had been enemies of God's
people. In this respect these two women are true
types of Mary, who was chosen by God to crush
the head of the serpent, the infernal enemy of mankind.
And if they deserved the title of blessed for
being the instruments of God in rescuing Israel
from temporal calamities, how much more does
Mary merit that appellation, who co-operated so
actively in the salvation of the human race!
</p>

<p>
The Evangelist proceeds: <q>And Mary, rising
up in those days, went ... into a city of Juda;
and she entered into the house of Zachary and
saluted Elizabeth. And it came to pass that when
Elizabeth heard the salutation of Mary the infant
leapt in her womb. And Elizabeth was filled
with the Holy Ghost, and she cried out with a loud
voice and said: Blessed art thou among women,
and blessed is the fruit of thy womb. And whence
is this to me that the mother of my Lord should
come to me? For behold, as soon as the voice of
thy salutation sounded in my ears, the infant in my
womb leaped for joy. And blessed art thou that
hast believed, because those things shall be accomplished
that were spoken to thee by the Lord.</q><note place='foot'>Luke i. 39-45.</note>
</p>

<p>
There is joy in Mary's heart in being chosen to
become the mother of the world's Redeemer. She
<pb n="177"/><anchor id="Pg177"/>
wishes by her visit to communicate that joy to her
cousin. The Sun of Justice is shining within her.
She desires to diffuse His rays through Elizabeth's
household. She is laden with spiritual treasures.
She must share them with her kinswoman, especially
as she is none the poorer in making others
richer.
</p>

<p>
The usual order of salutation is here reversed.
Age pays reverence to youth. A lady who is revered
by the whole community honors a lowly
maiden. An inspired matron expresses her astonishment
that her young kinswoman should deign
to visit her. She extols Mary's faith and calls her
blessed. She blends the praise of Mary with the
praise of Mary's Son, and even the infant John
testifies his reverential joy by leaping in his mother's
womb. And we are informed that during this
interview Elizabeth was filled with the Holy Ghost,
to remind us that the veneration she paid to her
cousin was not prompted by her own feelings, but
was dictated by the Spirit of God.
</p>

<p>
Then Mary breaks out into that sublime canticle,
the Magnificat: <q>My soul doth magnify the
Lord, and my spirit hath rejoiced in God my
Savior, because He hath regarded the humility of
his handmaid, for behold from henceforth all generations
shall call me blessed.</q><note place='foot'>Luke i.
46-48.</note> On these words
I shall pause to make one reflection.
</p>

<p>
The Holy Ghost, through the organ of Mary's
chaste lips, prophesies that all generations shall
call her blessed, with evident approval of the
praise she should receive.
</p>

<p>
What a daring prophecy is this! Among the
wonderful predictions recorded in Holy Scripture,
I can recall none that more strongly commands my
admiration. Here is a modest, retiring maiden,
<pb n="178"/><anchor id="Pg178"/>
living in an obscure village in a remote quarter of
the civilized world, openly announcing that every
age till the end of time, should pronounce her hallowed.
We have no reason to question this prophecy,
for it is recorded in the inspired pages of the
Gospel. And we know also without the shadow
of a doubt that the prophecy has been literally
fulfilled. For, in every epoch, and in every Christian
land from the rising to the setting sun, her
<hi rend='italic'>Magnificat</hi> has daily resounded.
</p>

<p>
Now the Catholic is the only Church whose children,
generation after generation, from the first to
the present century, have pronounced her blessed;
of all Christians in this land, they alone contribute
to the fulfilment of the prophecy.
</p>

<p>
Therefore, it is only Catholics that earn the approval
of Heaven by fulfilling the prediction of
the Holy Ghost.
</p>

<p>
Protestants not only concede that we bless the
name of Mary, but they even reproach us with being
too lavish in our praises of her.
</p>

<p>
On the other hand, they are careful to exclude
themselves from the <q>generations</q> that were destined
to call her blessed, for, in speaking of her,
they almost invariably withhold from her the title
of <emph>blessed</emph>, prefering to call her <hi rend='italic'>the Virgin</hi>, or
<hi rend='italic'>Mary the Virgin</hi>, or <hi rend='italic'>the Mother of Jesus</hi>.
And while Protestant churches will resound with the
praises of Sarah and Rebecca and Rachel, of
Miriam and Ruth, of Esther and Judith of the Old
Testament, and of Elizabeth and Anna, of Magdalen
and Martha of the New, the name of Mary
the Mother of Jesus is uttered with bated breath,
lest the sound of her name should make the
preacher liable to the charge of superstition.
</p>

<p>
The piety of a mother usually sheds additional
lustre on the son, and the halo that encircles her
<pb n="179"/><anchor id="Pg179"/>
brow is reflected upon his. The more the mother
is extolled, the greater honor redounds to the
son. And if this is true of all men who do not
choose their mothers, how much more strictly may
it be affirmed of Him who chose His own Mother,
and made her Himself such as He would have her,
so that all the glories of His Mother are essentially
His own. And yet we daily see ministers
of the Gospel ignoring Mary's exalted virtues
and unexampled privileges and parading her alleged
imperfections; nay, sinfulness, as if her Son
were dishonored by the piety, and took delight
in the defamation of His Mother.
</p>

<p>
Such defamers might learn a lesson from one
who made little profession of Christianity.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l><q rend='pre'>Is thy name Mary, maiden fair?</q></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Such should, methinks, its music be.</l>
<l>The sweetest name that mortals bear,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Were best befitting thee.</l>
<l>And she to whom it once was given</l>
<l><q rend='post'><hi rend='italic'>Was half of earth and half of
heaven</hi>.</q><note place='foot'>Oliver W. Holmes.</note></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
Once more the title of <hi rend='italic'>blessed</hi>, is given to Mary.
On one occasion a certain woman, lifting up her
voice, said to Jesus: <q>Blessed is the womb that
bore thee and the paps that gave thee suck.</q><note place='foot'>Luke xi. 27.</note> It
is true that our Lord replied: <q>Yea, rather (or
yea, likewise), blessed are they who hear the word
of God and keep it.</q> It would be an unwarrantable
perversion of the sacred text to infer from
this reply that Jesus intended to detract from
the praise bestowed on His Mother. His words
may be thus correctly paraphrased: She is
blessed indeed in being the chosen instrument of
My incarnation, but more blessed in keeping My
word. Let others be comforted in knowing that
though they cannot share with My Mother in the
<pb n="180"/><anchor id="Pg180"/>
privilege of her maternity, they can participate
with her in the blessed reward of them who hear
My word and keep it.
</p>

<p>
In the preceding passages we have seen Mary
declared blessed on four different occasions, and
hence, in proclaiming her blessedness, far from
paying her unmerited honor, we are but re-echoing
the Gospel verdict of saint and angel and of the
Spirit of God Himself.
</p>

<p>
Wordsworth, though not nurtured within the
bosom of the Catholic Church, conceives a true
appreciation of Mary's incomparable holiness in
the following beautiful lines:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l><q rend='pre'>Mother! whose virgin bosom was uncrossed</q></l>
<l>With the least shade of thought to sin allied;</l>
<l>Woman! above all women glorified,</l>
<l>Our tainted nature's solitary boast;</l>
<l>Purer than foam on central ocean tost,</l>
<l>Brighter than eastern skies at daybreak strewn</l>
<l>With fancied roses, than the unblemished moon</l>
<l>Before her wane begins on heaven's blue coast,</l>
<l>Thy image falls to earth. Yet some, I ween,</l>
<l>Not unforgiven, the suppliant knee might bend</l>
<l>As to a visible power, in which did blend</l>
<l>All that was mixed and reconciled in thee</l>
<l>Of mother's love with maiden purity,</l>
<l><q rend='post'>Of high with low, celestial with serene.</q></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
To honor one who has been the subject of divine,
angelic and saintly panegyric is to use a privilege,
and the privilege is heightened into a sacred duty
when we remember that the spirit of prophecy
foretold that she should ever be the unceasing
theme of Christian eulogy as long as Christianity
itself would exist.
</p>

<p>
<q>Honor he is worthy of, whom the king hath a
mind to honor.</q><note place='foot'>Esther
vi. 11.</note> The King of kings hath honored
Mary; His divine Son did not disdain to be
subject to her, therefore should we honor her,
<pb n="181"/><anchor id="Pg181"/>
especially as the honor we pay to her redounds
to God, the source of all glory. The Royal
Prophet, than whom no man paid higher praise
to God, esteemed the friends of God worthy of
all honor: <q>To me Thy friends, O God, are
made exceedingly honorable.</q><note place='foot'>Ps.
cxxxviii. (In Protestant version, Ps. cxxxix.)</note> Now the dearest
friends of God are they who most faithfully keep
His precepts: <q>You are My friends, if you do
the things that I command you.</q><note place='foot'>John
xv. 14.</note> Who fulfilled
the divine precepts better than Mary, who kept
all the words of her Son, pondering them in her
heart? <q>If any man minister to me,</q> says our
Savior, <q>him will My Father honor.</q><note place='foot'>John
xii. 26.</note> Who ministered
more constantly to Jesus than Mary, who
discharged towards Him all the offices of a tender
mother?
</p>

<p>
Heroes and statesmen may receive the highest
military and civic honors which a nation can bestow
without being suspected of invading the domain
of the glory which is due to God. Now is
not heroic sanctity more worthy of admiration
than civil service and military exploits, inasmuch
as religion ranks higher than patriotism and
valor? And yet the admirers of Mary's exalted
virtues can scarcely celebrate her praises without
being accused in certain quarters of Mariolatry.
</p>

<p>
When a nation wishes to celebrate the memory
of its distinguished men its admiration is not
confined to words, but vents itself in a thousand
different shapes. See in how many ways we honor
the memory of Washington. Monuments on which
his good deeds are recorded are erected to his
name. The grounds in which his remains repose
on the banks of the Potomac are kept in order by
a volunteer band of devoted ladies, who adorn
<pb n="182"/><anchor id="Pg182"/>
the place with flowers. And this cherished spot
is annually visited by thousands of pilgrims from
the most remote sections of the country. These
visitors will eagerly snatch a flower or a leaf
from a shrub growing near Washington's tomb,
or will strive even to clip off a little shred from
one of his garments, still preserved in the old
mansion, to bear home with them as precious
relics.
</p>

<p>
I have always observed when traveling on the
missions up and down the Potomac, that whenever
the steamer came to the point opposite Mount
Vernon the bell was tolled, and every eye was
directed toward Washington's grave.
</p>

<p>
The 22nd of February, Washington's birthday,
is kept as a national holiday, at least in certain
portions of the country. I well remember that
formerly military and fire companies paraded the
streets, and that patriotic speeches recounting the
heroic deeds of the first President were delivered,
the festivities of the day closing with a social
banquet.
</p>

<p>
As the citizens of the United States manifest in
divers ways their admiration for Washington, so
do the citizens of the republic of the Church love
to exhibit in corresponding forms their veneration
for the Mother of Jesus.
</p>

<p>
Monuments and statues are erected to her.
Thrice each day&mdash;at morn, noon and even&mdash;the
Angelus bells are rung, to recall to our mind the
Incarnation of our Lord, and the participation of
Mary in this great mystery of love.
</p>

<p>
Her shrines are tastefully adorned by pious
hands and visited by devoted children, who wear
her relics or any object which bears her image,
or which is associated with her name.
</p>

<pb n="183"/><anchor id="Pg183"/>

<p>
Her natal day and other days of the year, sacred
to her memory, are appropriately commemorated
by processions, by participation in the banquet of
the Eucharist, and by sermons enlarging on her
virtues and prerogatives.
</p>

<p>
As no one was ever suspected of loving his country
and her institutions less because of his revering
Washington, so no one can reasonably suppose
that our homage to God is diminished by our fostering
reverence for Mary. As our object in eulogizing
Washington is not so much to honor the man
as to vindicate those principles of which he was the
champion and exponent, and to express our gratitude
to God for the blessings bestowed on our country
through him, even so our motive in commemorating
Mary's name is not merely to praise her,
but still more to keep us in perpetual remembrance
of our Lord's Incarnation, and to show our
thankfulness to Him for the blessings wrought
through that great mystery in which she was so
prominent a figure. There is not a grain of incense
offered to Mary which does not ascend to the
throne of God Himself.
</p>

<p>
Experience sufficiently demonstrates that the
better we understand the part which Mary has
taken in the work of redemption, the more enlightened
becomes our knowledge of our Redeemer
Himself, and that the greater our love for her, the
deeper and broader is our devotion to Him; while
experience also testifies that our Savior's attributes
become more confused and warped in the
minds of a people in proportion as they ignore
Mary's relations to Him.
</p>

<p>
The defender of a beleaguered citadel concentrates
his forces on the outer fortifications and
towers, knowing well that the capture of these
outworks would endanger the citadel itself, and
that <emph>their</emph> safety involves <emph>its</emph> security.
</p>

<pb n="184"/><anchor id="Pg184"/>

<p>
Jesus Christ is the citadel of our faith, the
stronghold of our soul's affections. Mary is called
the <q>Tower of David,</q> and the gate of Sion which
the Lord loveth more than all the tabernacles of
Jacob,<note place='foot'>Ps. lxxxvi.</note>
and which He entered at His Incarnation.
</p>

<p>
So intimately is this living gate of Sion connected
with Jesus, the Temple of our faith, that
no one has ever assailed the former without invading
the latter. The Nestorian would have
Mary to be only an ordinary mother because he
would have Christ to be a mere man.
</p>

<p>
Hence, if we rush to the defence of the gate of
Sion, it is because we are more zealous for the
city of God. If we stand as sentinels around the
tower of David, it is because we are more earnest
in protecting Jerusalem from invasion. If we
forbid profane hands to touch the ark of the covenant,
it is because we are anxious to guard from
profanation the Lord of the ark. If we are so solicitous
about Mary's honor, it is because <q>the
love of Christ</q> presseth us. If we will not permit
a single wreath to be snatched from her fair
brow, it is because we are unwilling that a single
feature of Christ's sacred humanity should be
obscured, and because we wish that He should
ever shine forth in all the splendor of His glory,
and clothed in all the panoply of His perfections.
</p>

<p>
But you will ask: Why do you so often blend
together the worship of God and the veneration
of the Blessed Virgin? Why such exclamations
as <hi rend='italic'>Blessed be Jesus and Mary</hi>? Why do you
so often repeat in succession the Lord's prayer
and the Angelical salutation? Is not this practice
calculated to level all distinctions between the
Creator and His creature, and to excite the displeasure
of a God ever jealous of His glory?
</p>

<pb n="185"/><anchor id="Pg185"/>

<p>
Those who make this objection should remember
that the praises of the Lord and of His Saints
are frequently combined in Holy Scripture itself.
</p>

<p>
Witness Judith. On returning from the tent
of Holofernes, she sang: <q><emph>Praise ye the Lord, our
God</emph>, who hath not forsaken them that hope in
Him, <emph>and by me His handmaid</emph>, He hath fulfilled
His mercy which He promised to the house of
Israel.... And Ozias, the prince of the people
of Israel, said to her: <emph>Blessed art thou, O daughter</emph>,
by the Lord the Most High God, above all
women upon the earth, <emph>Blessed be the Lord</emph> who
made heaven and earth ... because He hath so
magnified thy name this day, that thy praise
shall not depart out of the mouth of men.</q><note place='foot'>Judith xiii.</note>
</p>

<p>
Witness Ecclesiasticus. After glorifying God
for His mighty works, he immediately sounds the
praises of Enoch and Noe, of Abraham, Isaac and
Jacob, of Moses and Aaron, of Samuel and
Nathan, of David and Josias, of Isaiah and Jeremiah,
and other kings and prophets of Israel.<note place='foot'>Eccles.
xliii. <hi rend='italic'>et seq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
Elizabeth, in the same breath, exclaims:
<q>Blessed art thou among women, and blessed is
the fruit of thy womb.</q><note place='foot'>Luke i.</note>
</p>

<p>
And Mary herself, under the inspiration of
Heaven, cries out: <q>My soul <emph>doth magnify the
Lord</emph>, and my spirit hath rejoiced in God my
Savior.... For, behold from henceforth all generations
<emph>shall call me blessed</emph>.</q><note place='foot'>Ibid.</note>
</p>

<p>
Here are the names of Creator and creature interwoven
like threads of gold and silver in the
same woof, without provoking the jealousy of
God.
</p>

<p>
God jealous of the honor paid to Mary! Will a
father be jealous of the honor paid to his child,
<pb n="186"/><anchor id="Pg186"/>
especially of a child who reflects his own image
and likeness, and exhibits those virtues which he
had inculcated on her tender mind? And is not
Mary God's child of predilection? Will an architect
be envious of the praise bestowed on a magnificent
temple which his genius planned and reared?
Is not the living temple of Mary's heart the work
of the Supreme Architect? Must she not say with
all of God's creatures: <q>Thy hands (O Lord) have
made me and formed me.</q> Is it not He who has
adorned that living temple with those rare beauties
which we so much admire? Has she not declared
so when she exclaimed: <q>He that is mighty hath
done great things to me, and holy is His
name!</q><note place='foot'>Luke i. 49.</note>
</p>

<p>
God jealous of the honor paid to Mary! As well
might we imagine that the sun, if endowed with
intelligence, would be jealous of the mellow, golden
cloud which encircles him, which reflects his
brightness and presents in bolder light his inaccessible
splendor. As well imagine that the same
luminary would be jealous of our admiration for
the beautiful rose, whose opening petals and rich
color and delicious fragrance are the fruit of his
beneficent rays.
</p>

<p>
Hence in uniting Mary's praise with that of
Jesus we are strictly imitating the sacred Text.
We are imitating Joachim, the High Priest, and
the people of God in Bethulia, who unite the praises
of Judith with the praises of Jehovah.
</p>

<p>
We are imitating the sacred writer of Ecclesiasticus
who, after extolling God for His mighty
works, sounds the praises of Enoch and Noe, of
Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, of David and Josiah, of
Isaiah and Jeremiah, and other Kings and Prophets
of Israel.
</p>

<p>
We are imitating Elizabeth, who exclaimed in
one breath: <q>Blessed art thou (Mary) among women
and blessed is (Jesus) the fruit of thy womb.</q>
</p>

<pb n="187"/><anchor id="Pg187"/>

<p>
And as no one ever suspected that the encomiums
pronounced on Judith and the virtuous Kings and
Prophets of Israel detracted from God's honor,
so neither do we lessen His glory in exalting the
Blessed Virgin. I find Jesus and Mary together
at the manger, together in Egypt, together in
Nazareth, together in the temple, together at the
cross. I find their names side by side in the Apostles'
and the Nicene Creed. It is fitting that both
should find a place in my heart, and that both
names should often flow successively from my
lips. Inseparable in life and in death, they should
not be divorced in my prayer. <q>What God hath
joined together, let not man put asunder.</q>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head>II. Is It Lawful To Invoke Her?</head>

<p>
The Church exhorts her children not only to
honor the Blessed Virgin, but also to invoke her
intercession. It is evident from Scripture that
the Angels and Saints in heaven can hear our
prayers and that they have the power and the
will to help us.<note place='foot'>Gen. xlviii.
16; Tobias xii. 12; Luke xv. 10; Zach. i. 12,
13.</note> Now, if the angels are conversant
with what happens on earth; if the Prophets, even
while clothed in the flesh, had a clear vision of
things which were transpiring at a great distance
from them; if they could penetrate into the future
and fortell events which were then hidden in the
womb of time, shall we believe that God withholds
a knowledge of our prayers from Mary, who is
justly styled the Queen of Angels and Saints?
For, as Mary's sanctity surpasses that of all other
mortals, her knowledge must be proportionately
greater than theirs, since knowledge constitutes
one of the sources of celestial bliss.
</p>

<p>
If Stephen, while his soul was still in the prison
of the body, <q><emph>saw</emph> the glory of God, and Jesus
<pb n="188"/><anchor id="Pg188"/>
standing on the right hand of
God;</q><note place='foot'>Acts vii. 55.</note> if Paul
<q><emph>heard</emph> secret words</q><note place='foot'>II.
Cor. xii. 4.</note> spoken in paradise, is it
surprising that Mary hears and sees us, now that
she is elevated to heaven and stands <q>face to
face</q> before God, the perfect Mirror of all knowledge?
It is as easy for God to enable His Saints
to see things terrestrial from heaven as things
celestial from earth.
</p>

<p>
The influence of Mary's intercession exceeds
that of the angels, patriarchs and prophets in the
same degree that her sanctity surpasses theirs.
If our heavenly Father listens so propitiously to
the voice of His servants, what will He refuse to
her who is His chosen daughter of predilection,
chosen among thousands to be the Mother of His
beloved Son? If we ourselves, though sinners,
can help one another by our prayers, how irresistible
must be the intercession of Mary, who
never grieved Almighty God by sin, who never
tarnished her white robe of innocence by the least
defilement, from the first moment of her existence
till she was received by triumphant angels
into heaven.
</p>

<p>
In speaking of the patronage of the Blessed Virgin,
we must never lose sight of her title of Mother
of our Redeemer nor of the great privileges which
that prerogative implies. Mary was the Mother
of Jesus. She exercised toward Him all the influence
that a prudent mother has over an affectionate
child. <q>Jesus,</q> says the Gospel, <q>was
subject to them</q><note place='foot'>Luke
ii. 51.</note>&mdash;that is, to Mary and Joseph.
We find this obedience of our Lord toward His
Mother forcibly exemplified at the marriage feast
of Cana. Her wishes are delicately expressed in
these words: <q>They have no wine.</q> He instantly
obeys her by changing water into wine, though the
<pb n="189"/><anchor id="Pg189"/>
time for exercising His public ministry and for
working wonders had not yet arrived.
</p>

<p>
Now, Mary has never forfeited in heaven the
title of Mother of Jesus. She is still His Mother,
and while adoring Him as her God she still retains
her maternal relations, and He exercises toward
her that loving willingness to grant her request
which the best of sons entertains for the
best of mothers.
</p>

<p>
Never does Jesus appear to us so amiable and
endearing as when we see Him nestled in the arms
of His Mother. We love to contemplate Him, and
artists love to represent Him, in that situation.
It appears to me that had we lived in Jerusalem
in His day and recognized, like Simeon, the Lord
of majesty in the form of an Infant, and had we
a favor to ask Him, we would present it through
Mary's hands while the Divine eyes of the Babe
were gazing on her sweet countenance. And even
so now. Never will our prayers find a readier
acceptance than when offered through her.
</p>

<p>
In invoking Our Lady's patronage we are actuated
by a triple sense of the majesty of God, our
own unworthiness and of Mary's incomparable
influence with her Heavenly Father. Conscious
of our natural lowliness and sins, we have frequent
recourse to her intercession in the assured
hope of being more favorably heard.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l><q rend='pre'>And even as children who have much offended</q></l>
<l>A too indulgent father, in great shame,</l>
<l>Penitent, and yet not daring unattended</l>
<l>To go into his presence, at the gate</l>
<l>Speak to their sister and confiding wait</l>
<l>Till she goes in before and intercedes;</l>
<l>So men, repenting of their evil deeds,</l>
<l>And yet not venturing rashly to draw near</l>
<l>With their requests, an angry Father's ear,</l>
<l>Offer to her their prayers and their confession,</l>
<l><q rend='post'>And she in heaven for them makes
intercession.</q><note place='foot'>Longfellow's <q>Golden Legend.</q></note></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<pb n="190"/><anchor id="Pg190"/>

<p>
Do you ask me, is Mary willing to assist you?
Does she really take an interest in your welfare?
Or is she so much absorbed by the fruition of God
as to be indifferent to our miseries? <q>Can a woman
forget her infant so as not to have pity on the fruit
of her womb?</q><note place='foot'>Isaiah xlix.
15.</note> Even so Mary will not forget us.
</p>

<p>
The love she bears us, her children by adoption,
can be estimated only by her love for her
Son by nature. It was Mary that nursed the Infant
Savior. It was her hands that clothed Him.
It was her breast that sheltered Him from the
rude storm and from the persecution of Herod.
She it was that wiped the stains from His brow
when taken down from the cross. Now we are the
brothers of Jesus. He is not ashamed, says the
Apostle, to call us His brethren.<note place='foot'>Heb.
ii 11.</note> Neither is Mary
ashamed to call us her children by adoption. At
the foot of the cross she adopted us in the person
of St. John. She is anxious to minister to
our souls as she ministered to the corporal wants
of her Son. She would be the instrument of God
in feeding us with Divine grace, in clothing us
with the garments of innocence, in sheltering us
from the storms of temptations, in wiping away
the stains of sin from our soul.
</p>

<p>
If the angels, though of a different nature from
ours, have so much sympathy for us as to rejoice
in our conversion,<note place='foot'>Luke xv.
7.</note> how great must be the interest
manifested toward us by Mary, who is of a
common nature with us, descended from the same
primitive parents, being bone of our bone, and
flesh of our flesh, and who once trod the thorny
path of life that we now tread!
</p>

<p>
Though not of the household of the faith, Edgar
A. Poe did not disdain to invoke Our Lady's intercession,
<pb n="191"/><anchor id="Pg191"/>
and to acknowledge the influence of
her patronage in heaven.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l><q rend='pre'>At morn&mdash;at noon&mdash;at twilight dim&mdash;</q></l>
<l>Maria! thou hast heard my hymn;</l>
<l>In joy and woe&mdash;in good and ill&mdash;</l>
<l>Mother of God, be with me still!</l>
<l>When the hours flew brightly by,</l>
<l>And not a cloud obscured the sky,</l>
<l>My soul, lest it should truant be,</l>
<l>Thy grace did guide to thine and thee;</l>
<l>Now, when storms of fate o'ercast</l>
<l>Darkly my present and my past,</l>
<l>Let my future radiant shine,</l>
<l><q rend='post'>With sweet hopes of thee and thine.</q></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
Some persons not only object to the invocation
of Mary as being unprofitable, but they even affect
to be scandalized at the confidence we repose
in her intercession, on the groundless assumption
that by praying to her we ignore and
dishonor God, and that we put the creature on a
level with the Creator.
</p>

<p>
Every Catholic child knows from the catechism
that to give to any creature the supreme honor
due to God alone is idolatry. How can we be said
to dishonor God, or bring Him down to a level
with His creature by invoking Mary, since we acknowledge
her to be a pure creature indebted
like ourselves to Him for every gift and influence
that she possesses? This is implied in the very
form of our petitions.
</p>

<p>
When we address our prayers to her we say:
<hi rend='italic'>Pray for us sinners</hi>, implying by these words that
she herself is a petitioner at the throne of Divine
mercy. To God we say: <hi rend='italic'>Give us our daily bread</hi>,
thereby acknowledging Him to be the source of all
bounty.
</p>

<p>
This principle being kept in view, how can we
be justly accused of slighting God's majesty by
invoking the intercession of His handmaid?
</p>

<pb n="192"/><anchor id="Pg192"/>

<p>
If a beggar asks and receives alms from me
through my servant, should I be offended at the
blessings which he invokes upon her? Far from
it. I accept them as intended for myself, because
she bestowed what was mine, and with my consent.
</p>

<p>
Our Lord says to His Apostles: <q>I dispose to
you a kingdom, that you may eat and drink at My
table in My kingdom and may sit upon thrones,
judging the twelve tribes of Israel.</q><note place='foot'>Luke
xxii. 29, 30.</note> And St.
Paul says: <q>Know you not that we shall judge
angels, how much more things of this world?</q><note place='foot'>I. Cor. vi.</note>
If the Apostles may sit at the table of the Lord
in heaven without prejudice to His majesty, surely
Our Lady can stand as an advocate before Him
without infringing on His rights. If they can
exercise the dread prerogative of judges of angels
and of men without trespassing on the Divine
judgeship of Jesus, surely Mary can fulfill the
more modest function of intercessor with her Son
without intruding on His supreme mediatorship,
for higher is the office of judge than that of advocate.
And yet, while no one is ever startled
at the power given to the Apostles, many are impatient
of the lesser privilege claimed for Mary.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head>III. Is It Lawful To Imitate Her As A Model?</head>

<p>
But while the exalted privileges of Mary render
her worthy of our veneration, while her saintly
influence renders her worthy of our invocation,
her personal life is constantly held up to us as
a pattern worthy of our imitation. If she occupies
so prominent a place in our pulpits, this
prominence is less due to her prerogatives as a
mother, or to her intercession as a patroness, than
to her example as a Saint.
</p>

<pb n="193"/><anchor id="Pg193"/>

<p>
After our Lord Jesus Christ, no one has ever
exercised so salutary and so dominant an influence
as the Blessed Virgin on society, on the
family and on the individual.
</p>

<p>
The Mother of Jesus exercises throughout the
Christian commonwealth that hallowing influence
which a good mother wields over the Christian
family.
</p>

<p>
What temple or chapel, how rude soever it may
be, is not adorned with a painting or a statue of
the Madonna? What house is not embellished
with an image of Mary? What Catholic child is
a stranger to her familiar face?
</p>

<p>
The priest and the layman, the scholar and the
illiterate, the prince and the peasant, the mother
and the maid, acknowledge her benign sway.
</p>

<p>
And if Christianity is so fruitful in comparison
with Paganism, in conjugal fidelity, in female purity
and in the respect paid to womanhood, these
blessings are in no small measure due to the force
of Mary's all-pervading influence and example.
Ever since the Son of God chose a woman to be
His mother man looks up to woman with a homage
akin to veneration.
</p>

<p>
The poet Longfellow pays the following tribute
to Mary's sanctifying influence:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l><q rend='pre'>This is indeed the blessed Mary's land,</q></l>
<l>Virgin and mother of our dear Redeemer!</l>
<l>All hearts are touched and softened at her name</l>
<l>Alike the bandit with the bloody hand,</l>
<l>The priest, the prince, the scholar and the peasant</l>
<l>The man of deeds, the visionary dreamer</l>
<l>Pay homage to her as one ever present!</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>And if our faith had given us nothing more</l>
<l>Than this example of all womanhood,</l>
<l>So mild, so merciful, so strong, so good,</l>
<l>So patient, peaceful, loyal, loving, pure,</l>
<l>This were enough to prove it higher and truer</l>
<l><q rend='post'>Than all the creeds the world had known
before.</q><note place='foot'>Longfellow's <q>Golden Legend.</q></note></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<pb n="194"/><anchor id="Pg194"/>

<p>
St. Ambrose gives us the following beautiful
picture of Mary's life before her espousals: <q>Let
the life,</q> he says, <q>of the Blessed Mary be ever
present to you in which, as in a mirror, the beauty
of chastity and the form of virtue shine forth.
She was a virgin not only in body, but in mind,
who never sullied the pure affection of her heart
by unworthy feelings. She was humble of heart,
serious in her conversation, fonder of reading
than of speaking. She placed her confidence
rather in the prayer of the poor than in the uncertain
riches of this world. She was ever intent
on her occupation, ... and accustomed to
make God rather than man the witness of her
thoughts. She injured no one, wished well to
all, reverenced age, yielded not to envy, avoided
all boasting, followed the dictates of reason and
loved virtue. When did she sadden her parents
even by a look?... There was nothing forward
in her looks, bold in her words or unbecoming
in her actions. Her carriage was not abrupt, her
gait not indolent, her voice not petulant, so that
her very appearance was the picture of her mind
and the figure of piety.</q>
</p>

<p>
Her life as a spouse and as a mother was a
counterpart of her earlier years. The Gospel relates
one little circumstance which amply suffices
to demonstrate Mary's super-eminent holiness of
life, and to exhibit her as a beautiful pattern to
those who are called to rule a household. The
Evangelist tells us that Jesus <q>was subject to
them</q><note place='foot'>Luke ii.
51.</note>&mdash;that is, to Mary and Joseph. He
obeyed all her commands, fulfilled her behests,
complied with her smallest injunctions; in a
word, He discharged toward her all the filial observances
which a dutiful son exercises toward
<pb n="195"/><anchor id="Pg195"/>
a prudent mother. These relations continued
from His childhood to His public life, nor did
they cease even then.
</p>

<p>
Now Jesus being the Son of God, <q>the brightness
of His glory and the figure of His substance,</q><note place='foot'>Heb. i. 3.</note>
could not sin. He was incapable of fulfilling
an unrighteous precept. The obvious conclusion
to be drawn from these facts is, that Mary
never sinned by commanding, as Jesus could not
sin by obeying; that all her precepts and counsels
were stamped with the seal of Divine approbation,
and that the Son never fulfilled any injunction
of His earthly Mother which was not
ratified by His Eternal Father in heaven.
</p>

<p>
Such is the beautiful portrait which the Church
holds up to the contemplation of her children,
that studying it they may admire the original,
admiring they may love, loving they may imitate,
and thus become more dear to God by being made
<q>conformable to the image of His Son,</q><note place='foot'>Rom. viii. 29.</note> of
whom Mary is the most perfect mirror.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<pb n="196"/><anchor id="Pg196"/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc' level1='Chapter XV. Sacred Images.'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='Chapter XV.'/>
<head type='sub'>Chapter XV.</head>
<head>Sacred Images.</head>

<p>
The veneration of the images of Christ and
His Saints is a cherished devotion in the
Catholic Church, and this practice will be
vindicated in the following lines.
</p>

<p>
It is true, indeed, that the making of holy images
was not so general among the Jews as it is
among us, because the Hebrews themselves were
prone to idolatry, and because they were surrounded
by idolatrous people, who might misconstrue
the purpose for which the images were intended.
For the same prudential reasons the
primitive Christians were very cautious in making
images, and very circumspect in exposing
them to the gaze of the heathen among whom
they lived, lest Christian images should be confounded
with Pagan idols.
</p>

<p>
The catacombs of Rome, to which the faithful
alone were admitted, abounded, however, in sacred
emblems and pious representations, which are
preserved even to this day and attest the practice
of the early Christian Church. We see there
painted on the walls or on vases of glass the
Dove, the emblem of the Holy Ghost, Christ carrying
His cross, or bearing on His shoulders the
lost sheep. We meet also the Lamb, an anchor
and a ship&mdash;appropriate types of our Lord, of
hope and of the Church.
</p>

<pb n="197"/><anchor id="Pg197"/>

<p>
The first crusade against images was waged in
the eighth century by Leo the Isaurian, Emperor
of Constantinople. He commanded the paintings
of our Lord and His Saints to be torn down from
the church walls and burned. He even invaded
the sanctuary of home, and snatched thence the
sacred emblems which adorned private residences.
He caused statues of bronze, silver and gold to
be melted down and conveniently converted them
into coins, upon which his own image was
stamped. Like Henry VIII. and Cromwell, this
royal Iconoclast affected to be moved by a zeal
for purity of worship, while avarice was the real
motive of his action.
</p>

<p>
The Emperor commanded the learned librarians
of his imperial library to give public approbation
to his decrees against images, and when
those conscientious men refused to endorse his
course they were all confined in the imperial library,
the building was set on fire and thirty
thousand volumes, the splendid basilica which
contained them, innumerable paintings and the
librarians themselves were involved in one common
destruction.
</p>

<p>
Constantine Copronymus prosecuted the vandalism
of Leo, his predecessor. Stephen, an intrepid
monk, presented to the Emperor a coin
bearing that tyrant's effigy, with these words:
<q>Sire, whose image is this?</q> <q>It is mine,</q> replied
the Emperor. The monk then threw down
the piece of money and trampled it. He was instantly
seized by the imperial attendants and soon
after put to a painful death. <q>Alas!</q> cried the
holy man to the Emperor, <q>if I am punished for
dishonoring the image of a mortal monarch, what
punishment do they deserve who burn the image
of Jesus Christ?</q>
</p>

<pb n="198"/><anchor id="Pg198"/>

<p>
The demolition of images was revived by the
Reformers of the sixteenth century. Paintings
and statues were ruthlessly destroyed, chiefly in
the British Isles, Germany and Holland, under
the pretext that the making of them was idolatrous.
But as the Iconoclasts of the eighth century
had no scruple about appropriating to their
own use the gold and silver of the statues which
they melted, neither had the Iconoclasts of the
sixteenth century any hesitation in confiscating
and worshiping in the idolatrous churches whose
statues and paintings they broke and disfigured.
</p>

<p>
A stranger who visits some of the desecrated
Catholic churches of Great Britain and the Continent
which are now used as Protestant temples
cannot fail to notice the mutilated statues of
the Saints still standing in their niches.
</p>

<p>
This barbaric warfare against religious memorials
was not only a grievous sacrilege, but an outrage
against the fine arts; and had the destroying
angels extended their ravages over Europe the
immortal works of Michael Angelo and Raphael
would be lost to us today.
</p>

<p>
The doctrine of the Catholic Church regarding
the use of sacred images is clearly and fully expressed
by the General Council of Trent in the
following words: <q>The images of Christ, and of
His Virgin Mother, and of other Saints, are to
be had and retained, especially in churches; and
a due honor and veneration is to be given to them;
not that any divinity or virtue is believed to be
in them for which they are to be honored, or that
any prayer is to be made to them, or that any
confidence is to be placed in them, as was formerly
done by the heathens, who placed their
hopes in idols; but because the honor which is
given them is referred to the originals which they
<pb n="199"/><anchor id="Pg199"/>
represent, so that by the images which we kiss,
and before which we uncover our heads or kneel,
we adore Christ and venerate His Saints, whose
likeness they represent.</q><note place='foot'>Sess. xxv.</note>
</p>

<p>
Every Catholic child clearly comprehends the
essential difference which exists between a Pagan
idol and a Christian image. The Pagans looked
upon an idol as a god endowed with intelligence
and the other attributes of the Deity. They were
therefore idolaters, or <hi rend='italic'>image worshipers</hi>. Catholic
Christians know that a holy image has no
intelligence or power to hear and help them. They
pay it a relative respect&mdash;that is, their reverence
for the copy is proportioned to the veneration
which they entertain for the heavenly original
to which it is also referred.
</p>

<p>
For the sake of my Protestant readers I may
here quote their own great Leibnitz on the reverence
paid to sacred images. He says, in his <hi rend='italic'>Systema
Theologicum</hi>, p. 142: <q>Though we speak of
the honor paid to images, yet this is only a manner
of speaking, which really means that we
honor not the senseless thing which is incapable
of understanding such honor, but the prototype,
which receives honor through its representation,
according to the teaching of the Council of Trent.
It is in this sense, I take it, that scholastic writers
have spoken of the same worship being paid to
images of Christ as to Christ our Lord Himself;
for the act which is called the worship of an
image is really the worship of Christ Himself,
through and in the presence of the image and by
occasion of it; by the inclination of the body toward
it as to Christ Himself, as rendering Him
more manifestly present, and raising the mind
more actively to the contemplation of Him. Certainly,
<pb n="200"/><anchor id="Pg200"/>
no sane man thinks, under such circumstances,
of praying in this wise: <q>Give me, O image,
what I ask; to thee, O marble or wood, I give
thanks;</q> but <q>Thee, O Lord, I adore; to Thee I give
thanks and sing songs of praise.</q> Given, then, that
there is no other veneration of images than that
which means veneration of their prototype, there is
surely no more idolatry in it than there is in the
respect shown in the utterance of the Most Holy
Names of God and Christ; for, after all, names
are but signs or symbols, and even as such inferior
to images, for they represent much less
vividly. So that when there is question of honoring
images, this is to be understood in the same
way as when it is said that at the name of Jesus
every knee shall bend, or that the name of the
Lord is blessed, or that glory be given to His
Name. Thus, the bowing before an image outside
of us is no more to be reprehended than the
worshiping before an external image in our own
minds; for the external image does but serve the
purpose of expressing visibly that which is internal.</q>
</p>

<p>
In the Book of Exodus we read: <q>Thou shalt
not make to thyself a graven thing, nor the likeness
of anything that is in heaven above, or in
the earth beneath, nor of those things that are in
the waters under the earth. Thou shalt not adore
them nor serve them.</q><note place='foot'>Chap. xx.</note> Protestants contend
that these words contain an absolute prohibition
against the making of images, while the Catholic
Church insists that the commandment referred
to merely prohibits us from worshiping them as
gods.
</p>

<p>
The text cannot mean the absolute prohibition
of making images; for in that case God would
<pb n="201"/><anchor id="Pg201"/>
contradict Himself by commanding in one part
of Scripture what He condemns in another. In
Exodus (xxv. 18), for instance, He commands
two cherubim of beaten gold to be made and
placed on each side of the oracle; and in Numbers
(xxi. 8) He commands Moses to make a
brazen serpent, and to set it up for a sign, that
<q>whosoever being struck by the fiery serpents
shall look upon it, shall live.</q> Are not cherubim
and serpents the likenesses of creatures in
heaven above, in the earth beneath and in the
waters under the earth? for cherubim dwell in
heaven and serpents are found on land and sea.
</p>

<p>
We should all, without exception, break the commandment
were we to take it in the Protestant
sense. Have you not at home the portraits of
living and departed relatives? And are not these
the likenesses of persons in heaven above and
on the earth beneath?
</p>

<p>
Westminster Abbey, though once a Catholic
Cathedral, is now a Protestant house of worship.
It is filled with the statues of illustrious men;
yet no one will accuse the English church of idolatry
in allowing those statues to remain there.
But you will say: The worshipers in Westminster
have no intention of adoring these statues.
Neither have we any intention of worshiping the
statues of the Saints. An English parson once
remarked to a Catholic friend: <q>Tom, don't you
pray to images?</q> <q>We pray before them,</q> replied
Tom; <q>but we have no intention of praying
to them.</q> <q>Who cares for your intention,</q>
retorted the parson. <q>Don't you pray at night?</q>
observed Tom. <q>Yes,</q> said the parson; <q>I pray
at my bed.</q> <q>Yes; you pray to the bed-post.</q>
<q>Oh, no!</q> said the reverend gentleman; <q>I have
<pb n="202"/><anchor id="Pg202"/>
no intention of doing that.</q> <q>Who cares,</q> replied
Tom, <q>for your intention.</q>
</p>

<p>
The moral rectitude or depravity of our actions
cannot be determined without taking into
account the intention.
</p>

<p>
There are many persons who have been taught
in the nursery tales, that Catholics worship idols.
These persons, if they visit Europe and see an
old man praying before an image of our Lord
or a Madonna which is placed along the wayside,
are at once confirmed in their prejudices. Their
zeal against idols takes fire and they write home,
adding one more proof of idolatry against the benighted
Romanists. If these superficial travelers
had only the patience to question the old man he
would tell them, with simplicity of faith, that
the statue had no life to hear or help him, but
that its contemplation inspired him with greater
reverence for the original.
</p>

<p>
As I am writing for the information of Protestants,
I quote with pleasure the following passage,
written by one of their own theologians, in the
<hi rend='italic'>Encyclopédie</hi> (Edit. d'Yverdun, tom. 1, art.
<hi rend='italic'>Adorer</hi>):
</p>

<p>
<q>When Lot prostrates himself before the two
angels it is an act of courtesy towards honored
guests; when Jacob bows down before Esau it is
an act of deference from a younger to an elder
brother; when Solomon bows low before Bethsabee
it is the honor which a son pays to his
mother; when Nathan, coming in before David,
<q>had worshiped, bowing down to the ground,</q> it
is the homage of a subject to his prince. But
when a man prostrates himself in prayer to God
it is the creature adoring the Creator. And if
these various actions are expressed&mdash;sometimes
by the word <hi rend='italic'>adore</hi>, sometimes
by <hi rend='italic'>worship</hi> or <hi rend='italic'>prostration</hi>&mdash;it
<pb n="203"/><anchor id="Pg203"/>
is not the bare meaning of the word
which has guided interpreters in rendering it,
but the nature of the case. When an Israelite
prostrated himself before the king no one thought
of charging him with idolatry. If he had done
the same thing in the presence of an idol, the very
same bodily act would have been called idolatry.
And why? Because all men would have judged
by his action that he regarded the idol as a real
Divinity and that he would express, in respect to
it, the sentiments manifested by adoration in the
limited sense which we give to the word. What
shall we think, then, of what Catholics do to
show honor to Saints, to relics, to the wood of
the cross? They will not deny that their acts of
reverence, in such cases, are very much like those
by which they pay outward honor to God. But
have they the same ideas about the Saints, the
relics and the cross as they have about God? I
believe that we cannot fairly accuse them of it.</q>
</p>

<p>
A gentleman who was present at the unveiling
of Clay's statue in the city of Richmond informed
me that as soon as the curtain was uplifted, and
the noble form of the Kentucky statesman appeared
in full view, the immense concourse of
spectators instinctively uncovered their heads.
<q>Why do you take off your hat?</q> playfully remarked
my friend to an acquaintance who stood
by. <q>In honor, of course, of Henry Clay,</q> he
replied. <q>But Henry is not there in the flesh.
You see nothing but <emph>clay</emph>.</q> <q>But my intention,
sir,</q> he continued, <q>is to do honor to the original.</q>
He answered correctly. And yet how
many of the same people would be shocked if
they saw a man take off his hat in the presence of
a statue of St. Peter! It is not, therefore, the
<pb n="204"/><anchor id="Pg204"/>
making of the image, but its worship, that is condemned
by the Decalogue.
</p>

<p>
Having seen the lawfulness of sacred images,
let us now consider the advantages to be derived
from their use.
</p>

<p>
First&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Religious paintings embellish the house
of God.</hi> What is more becoming than to adorn
the church, which is the shadow of the heavenly
Jerusalem, so beautifully described by St. John?<note place='foot'>Apoc. xxi.</note>
Solomon decorated the temple of God with
images of cherubim and other representations.
<q>And he overlaid the cherubim with gold. And
all the walls of the temple round about he carved
with divers figures and carvings.</q><note place='foot'>III. Kings vi.</note> If it was
meet and proper to adorn Solomon's temple,
which contained only the Ark of the Lord, how
much more fitting is it to decorate our churches,
which contain the Lord of the Ark? When I see
a church tastefully ornamented it is a sure sign
that the Master is at home, and that His devoted
subjects pay homage to Him in His court.
</p>

<p>
What beauty, what variety, what charming pictures
are presented to our view in this temple of
nature which we inhabit! Look at the canopy of
heaven. Look at the exquisite pictures painted
by the Hand of the Divine Artist on this earth.
<q>Consider the lilies of the field.... I say to you
that not even Solomon in all his glory was arrayed
as one of these.</q> If the temple of nature
is so richly adorned, should not our temples made
with hands bear some resemblance to it?
</p>

<p>
How many professing Christians must, like
David, reproach themselves for <q>dwelling in a
house of cedar, while the ark of God is lodged
with skins.</q><note place='foot'>II. Kings vii.
2.</note> How many are there whose private
<pb n="205"/><anchor id="Pg205"/>
apartments are adorned with exquisite paintings,
who affect to be scandalized at the sight of
a single pious emblem in their house of worship?
On the occasion of the celebration of Henry W.
Beecher's silver wedding several wealthy members
of his congregation adorned the walls of Plymouth
church with their private paintings. Their
object, of course, in doing so was not to honor
God, but their pastor. But if the portraits of
men were no desecration to that church, how can
the portraits of Saints desecrate ours?<note place='foot'>At
the Washington and Lee University, Lexington, Va., in
the <emph>sanctuary of the chapel</emph>, the portrait of an opulent benefactor
holds a conspicuous place.</note> And
what can be more appropriate than to surround
the Sanctuary of Jesus Christ with the portraits
of the Saints, especially of Mary and of the Apostles,
who, in their life, ministered to His sacred
person? And is it not natural for children to
adorn their homes with the likenesses of their
Fathers in the faith?
</p>

<p>
Second&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Religious paintings are the catechism
of the ignorant</hi>. In spite of all the efforts of
Church and State in the cause of education a
great proportion of the human race will be found
illiterate. Descriptive pictures will teach those
what books make known to the learned.
</p>

<p>
How many thousands would have died ignorant
of the Christian faith if they had not been enlightened
by paintings! When Augustine, the
Apostle of England, first appeared before King
Ethelbert to announce to him the Gospel, a silver
crucifix and a painting of our Savior were
borne before the preacher, and these images spoke
more tenderly to the eyes than his words to the
ears of his audience.
</p>

<p>
By means of religious emblems St. Francis
<pb n="206"/><anchor id="Pg206"/>
Xavier effected many conversions in India; and
by the same means Father De Smet made known
the Gospel to the savages of the Rocky Mountains.
</p>

<p>
Third&mdash;By exhibiting religious paintings in our
rooms <hi rend='italic'>we make a silent, though eloquent, profession
of our faith</hi>. I once called on a gentleman
in a distant city, some time during our late war,
and, on entering his library, I noticed two portraits,
one of a distinguished General, the other
of an Archbishop. These portraits at once proclaimed
to me the religious and patriotic sentiments
of the proprietor of the house. <q>Behold!</q>
he said to me, pointing to the pictures, <q>my religious
creed and my political creed.</q> If I see
a crucifix in a man's room I am convinced at
once that he is not an infidel.
</p>

<p>
Fourth&mdash;By the aid of sacred pictures <hi rend='italic'>our devotion
and love for the original are intensified,
because we can concentrate our thoughts more intently
on the object of our affections</hi>. Mark how
the eye of a tender child glistens on confronting
the painting of an affectionate mother. What
Christian can stand unmoved when contemplating
a picture of the Mother of Sorrows? How
much devotion has been fostered by the Stations
of the Cross? Observe the intense sympathy depicted
on the face of the humble Christian woman
as she silently passes from one station to another.
She follows her Savior step by step from the
Garden to Mount Calvary. The whole scene, like
a panoramic view, is imprinted on her mind, her
memory and her affections. Never did the most
pathetic sermon on the Passion enkindle such
heartfelt love, or evoke such salutary resolutions,
as have been produced by the silent spectacle of
our Savior hanging on the cross.
</p>

<p>
Fifth&mdash;The portraits of the Saints stimulate us
<pb n="207"/><anchor id="Pg207"/>
to the <hi rend='italic'>imitation of their virtues</hi>; and this is the
principal aim which the Church has in view in encouraging
the use of pious representations. One
object, it is true, is to honor the Saints; another
is to invoke them; but the principal end is to incite
us to an imitation of their holy lives. We
are exhorted to <q>look and do according to the
pattern shown us on the mount.</q><note place='foot'>Exod. xxv. 40.</note> Nor do I
know a better means for promoting piety than by
example.
</p>

<p>
If you keep at home the likenesses of George
Washington, of Patrick Henry, of Chief Justice
Taney, or of other distinguished men, the copies
of such eminent originals cannot fail to exercise
a salutary though silent influence on the mind and
heart of your child. Your son will ask you: <q>Who
are those men?</q> And when you tell him: <q>This
is Washington, the Father of his Country; this
is Patrick Henry, the ardent lover of civil liberty;
and this is Taney, the incorruptible Judge,</q> your
boy will imperceptibly imbibe not only a veneration
for those men, but a relish for the civic virtues
for which they were conspicuous. And in like
manner, when our children have constantly before
their eyes the purest and most exalted models of
sanctity, they cannot fail to draw from such contemplation
a taste for the virtues that marked
the lives of the originals.
</p>

<p>
Is not our country flooded with obscene pictures
and immodest representations which corrupt our
youths? If the agents of Satan employ means so
vile for a bad end; if they are cunning enough
to pour through the senses into the hearts of the
unwary the insidious poison of sin, by placing before
them lascivious portraits, in God's name, why
should not we sanctify the souls of our children
<pb n="208"/><anchor id="Pg208"/>
by means of pious emblems? Why should not we
make the eye the instrument of edification as the
enemy makes it the organ of destruction? Shall
the pen of the artist, the pencil of the painter and
the chisel of the sculptor be prostituted to the
basest purposes? God forbid! The arts were intended
to be the handmaids of religion.
</p>

<p>
Almost every moment of the day the eye is receiving
impressions from outward objects and
instantly communicating these impressions to the
soul. Thus the soul receives every day thousands
of impressions, good or bad, according to the
character of the objects presented to its gaze.
</p>

<p>
We cannot, therefore, over-estimate the salutary
effect produced upon us in a church or room
adorned with sacred paintings. We feel, while
in their presence, that we are in the company of
the just. The contemplation of these pious portraits
chastens our affections, elevates our
thoughts, checks our levity and diffuses around
us a healthy atmosphere.
</p>

<p>
I am happy to acknowledge that the outcry formerly
raised against images has almost subsided
of late. The epithet of <hi rend='italic'>idolaters</hi> is seldom applied
to us now. Even some of our dissenting
brethren are beginning to recognize the utility of
religious symbols and to regret that we have been
permitted, by the intemperate zeal of the Reformers,
to have so long the monopoly of them.
Crosses already surmount some of our Protestant
churches and replace the weather-cock.
</p>

<p>
A gentleman of Richmond recently informed
me that during the preceding Holy Week he
adorned with twelve crosses an Episcopal church
in which, eleven years before, the sight of a single
one was viewed with horror by the minister.
</p>

<p>
May the day soon come when all Christians
<pb n="209"/><anchor id="Pg209"/>
will join with us not only in venerating the sacred
symbol of salvation, but in worshiping at the same
altar.
</p>

</div>

<pb n="210"/><anchor id="Pg210"/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc' level1='Chapter XVI. Purgatory And Prayers For The Dead.'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='Chapter XVI.'/>
<head type='sub'>Chapter XVI.</head>
<head>Purgatory And Prayers For The Dead.</head>

<p>
The Catholic Church teaches that, besides a
place of eternal torments for the wicked and
of everlasting rest for the righteous, there
exists in the next life a middle state of temporary
punishment, allotted for those who have died
in venial sin, or who have not satisfied the justice
of God for sins already forgiven. She also
teaches us that, although the souls consigned to
this intermediate state, commonly called purgatory,
cannot help themselves, they may be aided
by the suffrages of the faithful on earth. The
existence of purgatory naturally implies the correlative
dogma&mdash;the utility of praying for the
dead&mdash;for the souls consigned to this middle state
have not reached the term of their journey. They
are still exiles from heaven and fit subjects for
Divine clemency.
</p>

<p>
The doctrine of an intermediate state is thus
succinctly asserted by the Council of Trent: <q>There
is a Purgatory, and souls there detained, are helped
by the prayers of the faithful, and especially by the
acceptable Sacrifice of the Altar.</q><note place='foot'>Sess. xxv.</note>
</p>

<p>
It is to be noted that the Council studiously abstains
from specifying the nature of the expiating
sufferings endured therein.
</p>

<pb n="211"/><anchor id="Pg211"/>

<p>
Is it not strange that this cherished doctrine
should also be called in question by the leveling
innovators of the sixteenth century, when we consider
that it is clearly taught in the Old Testament;
that it is, at least, insinuated in the New Testament;
that it is unanimously proclaimed by the
Fathers of the Church; that it is embodied in all
the ancient liturgies of the Oriental and the Western
church, and that it is a doctrine alike consonant
with our reason and eminently consoling to
the human heart?
</p>

<p>
First&mdash;It is a doctrine plainly contained in the
Old Testament and piously practiced by the Hebrew
people. At the close of an engagement which
Judas Machabeus had with the enemy he ordered
prayers and sacrifices to be offered up for his slain
comrades. <q>And making a gathering, he sent
twelve thousand drachms of silver to Jerusalem
for sacrifice to be offered for the sins of the dead,
thinking well and religiously concerning the resurrection.
For, if he had not hoped that they that
were slain should rise again, it would have seemed
superfluous and vain to pray for the dead.... It
is, therefore, a holy and wholesome thought to pray
for the dead, that they may be loosed from sins.</q><note place='foot'>II.
Mach. xii. 43-46.</note>
</p>

<p>
These words are so forcible that no comment of
mine could render them clearer. The passage
proved a great stumbling-block to the Reformers.
Finding that they could not by any evasion weaken
the force of the text, they impiously threw overboard
the Books of Machabees, like a man who
assassinates a hostile witness, or like the Jews
who sought to kill Lazarus, lest his resurrection
should be a testimony in favor of Christ, and pretended
that the two books of Machabees were
<pb n="212"/><anchor id="Pg212"/>
apocryphal. And yet they have precisely the same
authority as the Gospel of St. Matthew or any other
portion of the Bible, for the canonicity of the Holy
Scriptures rests solely on the authority of the
Catholic Church, which proclaimed them inspired.
</p>

<p>
But even admitting, for the sake of argument,
that the Books of Machabees were not entitled to
be ranked among the canonical Books of Holy
Scripture, no one, at least, has ever denied that
they are truthful historical monuments, and as
such that they serve to demonstrate that it was a
prevailing practice among the Hebrew people, as
it is with us, to offer up prayers and sacrifices for
the dead.
</p>

<p>
Second&mdash;When our Savior, the Founder of the
New Law, appeared on earth, He came to lop off
those excrescences which had grown on the body
of the Jewish ecclesiastical code, and to purify
the Jewish Church from those human traditions
which, in the course of time, became like tares
mixed with the wheat of sound doctrine. For instance,
He condemns the Pharisees for prohibiting
the performance of works of charity on the
Sabbath day, and in the twenty-third chapter of
St. Matthew He cites against them a long catalogue
of innovations in doctrine and discipline.
</p>

<p>
But did our Lord, at any time, reprove the
Jews for their belief in a middle state, or for
praying for the dead, a practice which, to His
knowledge, prevailed among the people? Never.
On the contrary, more than once both He and the
Apostle of the Gentiles insinuate the doctrine of
purgatory.
</p>

<p>
Our Savior says: <q>Whosoever shall speak a
word against the Son of man it shall be forgiven
him. But he that shall speak against the Holy
<pb n="213"/><anchor id="Pg213"/>
Ghost it shall not be forgiven him, neither in this
world nor in the world to come.</q><note place='foot'>Matt. xii. 32.</note> When our
Savior declares that a sin against the Holy Ghost
shall not be forgiven in the next life, He evidently
leaves us to infer that there are some sins which
will be pardoned in the life to come. Now in the
next life, sins cannot be forgiven in heaven, for,
nothing defiled can enter there; nor can they be
forgiven in hell, for, out of hell there is no redemption.
They must, therefore, be pardoned in the
intermediate state of Purgatory.
</p>

<p>
St. Paul tells us that <q>every man's work shall
be manifest</q> on the Lord's day. <q>The fire shall
try every man's work of what sort it is. If any
man's work abide,</q> that is, if his works are holy,
<q>he shall receive a reward. If any man's work
burn,</q> that is, if his works are faulty and imperfect,
<q>he shall suffer loss; but he himself shall
be saved, yet so as by fire.</q><note place='foot'>I.
Cor. iii. 13-15.</note> His soul will be
ultimately saved, but he shall suffer, for a temporary
duration, in the purifying flames of Purgatory.
</p>

<p>
This interpretation is not mine. It is the unanimous
voice of the Fathers of Christendom. And
who are they that have removed the time-honored
landmarks of Christian faith by rejecting the
doctrine of purgatory? They are discontented
churchmen impatient of the religious yoke, men
who appeared on the stage sixteen hundred years
after the foundation of Christianity. Judge you,
reader, whom you ought to follow. If you want
to know the true import of a vital question in
the Constitution, would you not follow the decision
of a Story, a Jefferson, a Marshall, a
Taney, jurists and statesmen, who were the recognized
expounders of the Constitution? Would
<pb n="214"/><anchor id="Pg214"/>
you not prefer their opinion to that of political
demagogues, who have neither learning, nor authority,
nor history to support them, but some
selfish end to further? Now, the same motive
which you have for rejecting the opinion of an
ignorant politician and embracing that of eminent
jurists, on a constitutional question, impels you
to cast aside the novelties of religious innovators
and to follow the unanimous sentiments of the
Fathers in reference to the subject of purgatory.
</p>

<p>
Third&mdash;I would wish to place before you extended
extracts from the writings of the early
Fathers of the Church bearing upon this subject;
but I must content myself with quoting a few of
the most prominent lights of primitive Christianity.
</p>

<p>
Tertullian, who lived in the second century, says
that <q>the faithful wife will pray for the soul of
her deceased husband, particularly on the anniversary
day of his falling asleep (death). And
if she fail to do so she hath repudiated her husband
as far as in her lies.</q><note place='foot'>De Monogam., n. x.</note>
</p>

<p>
Eusebius, the historian (fourth century), describing
the funeral of Constantine the Great,
says that the body of the blessed prince was
placed on a lofty bier, and the ministers of God
and the multitude of the people, with tears and
much lamentation, offered up prayers and sacrifice
for the repose of his soul. He adds that this
was done in accordance with the desires of that
religious monarch, who had erected in Constantinople
the great church in honor of the Apostles,
so that after his death the faithful might there
remember him.<note place='foot'>Euseb., B. iv., c. 71.</note>
</p>

<p>
St. Cyril of Jerusalem, fourth century, writes:
<q>We commemorate the Holy Fathers, and Bishops,
<pb n="215"/><anchor id="Pg215"/>
and all who have fallen asleep from amongst
us, believing that the supplications which we present
will be of great assistance to their souls, while
the holy and tremendous Sacrifice is offered up.</q>
He answers by an illustration those that might
be disposed to doubt the efficacy of prayers for
the dead: <q>If a king had banished certain persons
who had offended him, and their relations,
having woven a crown, should offer it to him
in behalf of those under his vengeance, would he
not grant a respite to their punishments? So
we, in offering up a crown of prayers in behalf
of those who have fallen asleep, will obtain for
them forgiveness through the merits of Christ.</q><note place='foot'>Catech.,
n. 9, 10, p. 328.</note>
</p>

<p>
St. Ephrem, in the same century, says: <q>I conjure
you, my brethren and friends, in the name
of that God who commands me to leave you, to
remember me when you assemble to pray. Do
not bury me with perfumes. Give them not to
me, but to God. Me, conceived in sorrows, bury
with lamentations, and instead of perfumes assist
me with your prayers; for the dead are benefited
by the prayers of living Saints.</q><note place='foot'>Apud
Faith of Catholics, Vol. III., p. 162 and seq.</note>
</p>

<p>
St. Ambrose (same century), on the death of
the Emperors Gratian and Valentinian, says:
<q>Blessed shall both of you be (Gratian and Valentinian),
if my prayers can avail anything. No
day shall pass you over in silence. No prayer
of mine shall omit to honor you. No night shall
hurry by without bestowing on you a mention in
my prayers. In every one of the oblations will
I remember you.</q> On the death of the Emperor
Theodosius he offers the following prayer: <q>Give
perfect rest to Thy servant Theodosius, that rest
which Thou hast prepared for Thy Saints. May
<pb n="216"/><anchor id="Pg216"/>
his soul return thither whence it descended, where
it cannot feel the sting of death.... I loved him
and therefore will I follow him, even unto the land
of the living. Nor will I leave him until, by tears
and prayers, I shall lead him ... unto the holy
mountain of the Lord, where is life undying, where
corruption is not, nor sighing nor mourning.</q><note place='foot'>See
Faith of Catholics, Vol. III., p. 176.</note>
</p>

<p>
St. Jerome, in the same century, in a letter of
condolence to Pammachius, on the death of his
wife Paulina, writes: <q>Other husbands strew violets
and roses on the graves of their wives. Our
Pammachius bedews the hallowed dust of Paulina
with balsams of alms.</q><note place='foot'>Ibid., p. 177.</note>
</p>

<p>
St. Chrysostom writes: <q>It was not without
good reason <emph>ordained by the Apostles</emph> that mention
should be made of the dead in the tremendous
mysteries, because they knew well that they
would receive great benefit from it.</q><note place='foot'>Ibid., Vol. II.</note>
</p>

<p>
St. Augustine, who lived in the beginning of
the fifth century, relates that when his mother
was at the point of death she made this last request
of him: <q>Lay this body anywhere; let not
the care of it in anyway disturb you. This only
I request of you, that you would remember me
at the altar of the Lord, wherever you be.</q>
</p>

<p>
And that pious son prays for his mother's soul
in the most impassioned language: <q>I therefore,</q>
he says, <q>O God of my heart, do now beseech
Thee for the sins of my mother. Hear me through
the medicine of the wounds that hung upon the
wood.... May she, then, be in peace with her
husband.... And inspire, my Lord, ... Thy
servants, my brethren, whom with voice and heart
and pen I serve, that as many as shall read these
<pb n="217"/><anchor id="Pg217"/>
words may remember at Thy altar, Monica, Thy
servant....</q><note place='foot'>Confessions, Book ix.</note>
</p>

<p>
These are but a few specimens of the unanimous
voice of the Fathers regarding the salutary
practice of praying for the dead.
</p>

<p>
You now perceive that this devotion is not an
invention of modern times, but a doctrine universally
enforced in the first and purest ages of
the Church.
</p>

<p>
You see that praying for the dead was not a
devotion cautiously recommended by some obscure
or visionary writer, but an act of religion
preached and inculcated by all the great Doctors
and Fathers of the Church, who are the recognized
expounders of the Christian religion.
</p>

<p>
You see them, too, inculcating this doctrine not
as a cold and abstract principle, but as an imperative
act of daily piety, and embodying it in their
ordinary exercises of devotion.
</p>

<p>
They prayed for the dead in their morning and
evening devotions. They prayed for them in their
daily office, and in the Sacrifice of the Mass. They
asked the prayers of the congregation for the
souls of the deceased in the public services of
Sunday. On the monuments which were erected
to the dead, some of which are preserved even to
this day, epitaphs were inscribed, earnestly invoking
for their souls the prayers of the living.
How gratifying it is to our Catholic hearts that
a devotion so soothing to afflicted spirits is at
the same time so firmly grounded on the tradition
of ages!
</p>

<p>
Fourth&mdash;That the practice of praying for the
dead has descended from Apostolic times is evident
also from the <hi rend='italic'>Liturgies</hi> of the Church. A
Liturgy is the established formulary of public
<pb n="218"/><anchor id="Pg218"/>
worship, containing the authorized prayers of the
Church. The Missal, or Mass-book, for instance,
which you see on our altars, contains a portion
of the Liturgy of the Catholic Church. The principal
Liturgies are the Liturgy of St. James the
Apostle, who founded the Church of Jerusalem;
the Liturgy of St. Mark the Evangelist, founder
of the Church of Alexandria, and the Liturgy of
St. Peter, who established the Church in Rome.
These Liturgies are called after the Apostles who
compiled them. There are, besides, the Liturgies
of St. Chrysostom and St. Basil, which are chiefly
based on the model of that of St. James.
</p>

<p>
Now, all these Liturgies, without exception,
have prayers for the dead, and their providential
preservation serves as another triumphant vindication
of the venerable antiquity of this Catholic
doctrine.
</p>

<p>
The Eastern and the Western churches were
happily united until the fourth and fifth centuries,
when the heresiarchs Arius, Nestorius and Eutyches
withdrew millions of souls from the centre
of unity. The followers of these sects were called,
after their founders, Arians, Nestorians and Eutychians,
and from that day to the present the two
latter bodies have formed distinct communions,
being separated from the Catholic Church in the
East, just as the Protestant churches are separated
from her in the West.
</p>

<p>
The Greek schismatic church, of which the present
Russo-Greek church is the offspring, severed
her connection with the See of Rome in the ninth
century.
</p>

<p>
But in leaving the Catholic Church these Eastern
sects retained the old Liturgies, which they
use to this day, as I shall presently demonstrate.
</p>

<p>
During my sojourn in Rome at the Ecumenical
<pb n="219"/><anchor id="Pg219"/>
Council I devoted a great deal of my leisure time
to the examination of the various Liturgies of the
schismatic churches of the East. I found in all
of them formulas of prayers for the dead almost
identical with that of the Roman Missal: <q>Remember,
O Lord, Thy servants who are gone before
us with the sign of faith, and sleep in peace.
To these, O Lord, and to all who rest in Christ
grant, we beseech Thee, a place of refreshment,
light and peace, through the same Jesus Christ
our Lord.</q>
</p>

<p>
Not content with studying their books, I called
upon the Oriental Patriarchs and Bishops in communion
with the See of Rome, who belong to the
Armenian, the Chaldean, the Coptic, the Maronite
and Syriac rites. They all assured me that the
schismatic Christians of the East among whom
they live have, without exception, prayers and
sacrifices for the dead.
</p>

<p>
Now, I ask, when could those Eastern sects have
commenced to adopt the Catholic practice of praying
for the dead? They could not have received
it from us since the ninth century, because the
Greek church separated from us then and has
had no communion with us since that time, except
at intervals, up to the twelfth century. Nor
could they have adopted the practice since the
fourth or fifth century, inasmuch as the Arians,
Nestorians and Eutychians have had no religious
communication with us since that period. Therefore,
in common with us, they received this doctrine
from the Apostles. If men living in different
countries drink wine having the same flavor
and taste and color, the inference is that the wine
was made from the same species of grape. So
must we conclude that this refreshing doctrine of
<pb n="220"/><anchor id="Pg220"/>
intercession for the dead has its root in the Apostolic
tree of knowledge planted by our Savior.
</p>

<p>
Fifth&mdash;I have already spoken of the devotion
of the ancient Jewish church to the souls of the
departed. But perhaps you are not aware that
the Jews retain to this day, in their Liturgy, the
pious practice of praying for the dead. Yet such
in reality is the case.
</p>

<p>
Amid all the wanderings and vicissitudes of
life, though dismembered and dispersed like sheep
without a shepherd over the face of the globe, the
children of Israel have never forgotten or neglected
the sacred duty of praying for their deceased
brethren.
</p>

<p>
Unwilling to make this assertion without the
strongest evidence, I procured from a Jewish convert
an authorized Prayer-Book of the Hebrew
church, from which I extract the following
formula of prayers which are prescribed for
funerals: <q>Departed brother! mayest thou find
open the gates of heaven, and see the city of
peace and the dwellings of safety, and meet the
ministering angels hastening joyfully toward thee.
And may the High Priest stand to receive thee,
and go thou to the end, rest in peace, and rise
again into life. May the repose established in
the celestial abode ... be the lot, dwelling and
the resting-place of the soul of our deceased
brother (whom the Spirit of the Lord may guide
into Paradise), who departed from this world, according
to the will of God, the Lord of heaven and
earth. May the supreme King of kings, through
His infinite mercy, hide him under the shadow of
His wing. May He raise him at the end of his
days and cause him to drink of the stream of
His delights.</q><note place='foot'>Jewish Prayer Book.
Edited by Isaac Leeser, published by
Slote &amp; Mooney, Philadelphia.</note>
</p>

<pb n="221"/><anchor id="Pg221"/>

<p>
Among the many-sided merits of Shakespeare
may be mentioned his happy faculty of portraying
to life the manners and customs and traditional
faith of the times which he describes. How deep-rooted
in the Christian heart in pre-Reformation
times, was the belief in Purgatory, may be inferred
from a passage in Hamlet who probably lived in
the early part of the eighth century. Thus speaks
to Hamlet the spirit of his murdered father:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><q rend='pre'>I am thy father's spirit,</q></l>
<l>Doom'd for a certain time to walk the night;</l>
<l>And for the day confin'd too fast in fires,</l>
<l>Till the foul crimes done in my days of nature</l>
<l><q rend='post'>Are burnt and purg'd away.</q><note place='foot'>Act. I.</note></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
I am happy to say that the more advanced and
enlightened members of the Episcopalian church
are steadily returning to the faith of their fore-fathers
regarding prayers for the dead. An acquaintance
of mine, once a distinguished clergyman
of the Episcopal communion, but now a convert,
informed me that hundreds of Protestant
clergymen in this country, and particularly in
England, have a firm belief in the efficacy of prayers
for the dead, but for well-known reasons they
are reserved in the expression of their faith. He
easily convinced me of the truth of his assertion,
particularly as far as the Church of England is
concerned, by sending me six different works published
in London, all bearing on the subject of
Purgatory. These books are printed under the auspices
of the Protestant Episcopal church; they all
contain prayers for the dead and prove, from Catholic
grounds, the existence of a middle state after
death and the duty of praying for our deceased
brethren.<note place='foot'>See Path of Holiness,
Rivington's, London. Treasury of Devotion, Ibid.
Catechism of Theology, Masten, London.</note>
</p>

<pb n="222"/><anchor id="Pg222"/>

<p>
To sum up, we see the practice of praying for
the dead enforced in the ancient Hebrew church
and in the Jewish synagogue of today. We see it
proclaimed age after age by all the Fathers of
Christendom. We see it incorporated in every
one of the ancient Liturgies of the East and of the
West. We see it zealously taught by the Russian
church of today, and by that immense family of
schismatic Christians scattered over the East. We
behold it, in fine, a cherished devotion of three hundred
millions of Catholics, as well as of a respectable
portion of the Episcopal church.
</p>

<p>
Would it not, my friend, be the height of rashness
and presumption in you to prefer your private
opinion to this immense weight of learning,
sanctity and authority? Would it not be impiety
in you to stand aside with sealed lips while the
Christian world is sending up an unceasing <hi rend='italic'>De
profundis</hi> for departed brethren? Would it not
be cold and heartless in you not to pray for your
deceased friends, on account of prejudices which
have no grounds in Scripture, tradition or reason
itself?
</p>

<p>
If a brother leaves you to cross the broad Atlantic,
religion and affection prompt you to pray
for him during his absence. And if the same
brother crosses the narrow sea of death to pass
to the shores of eternity, why not pray for him
then also? When he crosses the Atlantic his soul,
imprisoned in the flesh, is absent from you; when
he passes the sea of death his soul, released from
the flesh, has gone from you. What difference
does this make with regard to the duty of your
intercession? For what is death? A mere separation
of body and soul. The body, indeed, dies,
but the soul <q>lives and moves and has its being.</q>
It continues after death, as before, to think, to
<pb n="223"/><anchor id="Pg223"/>
remember, to love. And do not God's dominion
and mercy extend over that soul beyond the grave
as well as as this side of it? Who shall place
the limits to God's empire and say to Him:
<q>Thus far Thou shalt go and no farther?</q> Two
thousand years after Abraham's death our Lord
said: <q>I <emph>am</emph> the God of Abraham, of Isaac, and
of Jacob. He <emph>is</emph> not the God of the dead, but of
the living.</q><note place='foot'>Mark xii. 26, 27.</note>
</p>

<p>
If, then, it is profitable for you to pray for
your brother in the flesh, why should it be useless
for you to pray for him out of the flesh? For
while he was living you prayed not for his body,
but for his soul.
</p>

<p>
If this brother of yours dies with some slight
stains upon his soul, a sin of impatience, for instance,
or an idle word, is he fit to enter heaven
with these blemishes upon his soul? No; the sanctity
of God forbids it, for <q>nothing defiled shall
enter the Kingdom of Heaven.</q><note place='foot'>Apoc.
xxi. 27.</note> Will you consign
him, for these minor transgressions, to eternal
torments with adulterers and murderers? No;
the justice and mercy of God forbid it. Therefore,
your common sense demands a middle place
of expiation for the purgation of the soul before
it is worthy of enjoying the companionship of God
and His Saints.
</p>

<p>
God <q>will render to every man according to his
works,</q>&mdash;to the pure and unsullied everlasting
bliss; to the reprobate eternal damnation; to souls
stained with minor faults a place of temporary
purgation. I cannot recall any doctrine of the
Christian religion more consoling to the human
heart than the article of faith which teaches the
<pb n="224"/><anchor id="Pg224"/>
efficacy of prayers for the faithful departed. It
robs death of its sting. It encircles the chamber
of mourning with a rainbow of hope. It assuages
the bitterness of our sorrow, and reconciles us to
our loss. It keeps us in touch with the departed
dead as correspondence keeps us in touch with the
absent living. It preserves their memory fresh and
green in our hearts.
</p>

<p>
It gives us that keen satisfaction which springs
from the consciousness that we can aid those loved
ones who are gone before us by alleviating their
pains, shortening their exile, and hastening their
entrance into their true country.
</p>

<p>
It familiarizes us with the existence of a life beyond
the grave, and with the hope of being reunited
with those whom we cherished on earth, and
of dwelling with them in that home where there is
no separation, or sorrow, or death, but eternal joy
and peace and rest.
</p>

<p>
I have seen a devoted daughter minister with
tender solicitude at the sick-bed of a fond parent.
Many an anxious day and sleepless night did she
watch at his bedside. She moistened the parched
lips, and cooled the fevered brow, and raised the
drooping head on its pillow. Every change in
her patient for better or worse brought a corresponding
sunshine or gloom to her heart. It was
filial love that prompted all this. Her father
died and she followed his remains to the grave.
Though not a Catholic, standing by the bier she
burst those chains which a cruel religious prejudice
had wrought around her heart, and, rising
superior to her sect, she cried out: <hi rend='italic'>Lord, have
mercy on his soul</hi>. It was the voice of nature and
of religion.
</p>

<p>
Oh, far from us a religion which would decree
an eternal divorce between the living and the
<pb n="225"/><anchor id="Pg225"/>
dead. How consoling is it to the Catholic to think
that, in praying thus for his departed friend, his
prayers are not in violation of, but in accordance
with, the voice of the Church; and that as, like
Augustine, he watches at the pillow of a dying
mother, so like Augustine, he can continue the
same office of piety for her soul after she is dead
by praying for her! How cheering the reflection
that the golden link of prayer unites you still to
those who <q>fell asleep in the Lord,</q> that you
can still speak to them and pray for them!
</p>

<p>
Tennyson grasps the Catholic feeling when he
makes his hero, whose course is run, thus address
his surviving comrade, Sir Bedivere:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l><q rend='pre'>I have lived my life, and that which I have done</q></l>
<l>May He within Himself make pure; but thou,</l>
<l>If thou shouldst never see my face again,</l>
<l>Pray for my soul. More things are wrought by prayer</l>
<l>Than this world dreams of. Wherefore, let thy voice</l>
<l>Rise like a fountain for me night and day.</l>
<l>For what are men better than sheep or goats</l>
<l>That nourish a blind life within the brain,</l>
<l>If knowing God they lift not hands of prayer</l>
<l>Both for themselves and those who call them friend?</l>
<l>For so the whole round earth is every way</l>
<l><q rend='post'>Bound by gold chains about the feet of
God.</q><note place='foot'>Morte D'Arthur.</note></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
Oh! it is this thought that robs death of its
sting and makes the separation of friends endurable.
If your departed friend needs not your
prayers, they are not lost, but, like the rain absorbed
by the sun, and descending again in fruitful
showers on our fields, they will be gathered
by the Sun of justice, and will fall in refreshing
showers of grace upon your head: <q>Cast thy
bread upon the running waters; for, after a long
time, thou shalt find it again.</q><note place='foot'>Eccles. xi. 1.</note>
</p>

</div>

<pb n="226"/><anchor id="Pg226"/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc' level1='Chapter XVII. Civil And Religious Liberty.'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='Chapter XVII.'/>
<head type='sub'>Chapter XVII.</head>
<head>Civil And Religious Liberty.</head>

<p>
A man enjoys <emph>religious</emph> liberty when he possesses
the free right of worshiping God according
to the dictates of a right conscience,
and of practicing a form of religion most in accordance
with his duties to God. Every act infringing
on his freedom of conscience is justly
styled religious intolerance. This religious liberty
is the true right of every man because it corresponds
with a most certain duty which God has
put upon him.
</p>

<p>
A man enjoys <emph>civil</emph> liberty when he is exempt
from the arbitrary will of others, and when he is
governed by equitable laws established for the
general welfare of society. So long as, in common
with his fellow-citizens, he observes the laws
of the state, any exceptional restraint imposed
upon him, in the exercise of his rights as a citizen,
is so far an infringement on his civil liberty.
</p>

<p>
I here assert the proposition, which I hope to
confirm by historical evidence, that the Catholic
Church has always been the zealous promoter of
religious and civil liberty; and that whenever any
encroachments on these sacred privileges of man
were perpetrated by professing members of the
Catholic faith, these wrongs, far from being sanctioned
by the Church, were committed in palpable
violation of her authority.
</p>

<pb n="227"/><anchor id="Pg227"/>

<p>
Her doctrine is, that as man by his <emph>own free will</emph>
fell from grace, so of his <emph>own free will</emph> must he
return to grace. Conversion and coercion are two
terms that can never be reconciled. It has ever
been a cardinal maxim, inculcated by sovereign
Pontiffs and other Prelates, that no violence or undue
influence should be exercised by Christian
princes or missionaries in their efforts to convert
souls to the faith of Jesus Christ.
</p>

<p>
Pope Gregory I. in the latter part of the Sixth
Century, compelled the Bishop of Terracina to restore
to the Jews, the synagogue which he had
seized, declaring that they should not be coerced
into the Church, but should be treated with meekness
and charity. The great Pontiff issued the
same orders to the Prelates of Sardinia and Sicily
in behalf of the persecuted Jews.
</p>

<p>
St. Augustine and his companions, who were
sent by Pope Gregory I. to England for the conversion
of that nation, had the happiness of baptizing
in the true faith King Ethelbert and many
of his subjects. That monarch, in the fervor of his
zeal, was most anxious that all his subjects should
immediately follow his example; but the missionaries
admonished him that he should scrupulously
abstain from violence in the conversion of his people,
for the Christian religion should be voluntarily
embraced.
</p>

<p>
Pope Nicholas I. also warned Michael, king of
the Bulgarians, against employing force or constraint
in the conversion of idolaters.
</p>

<p>
The fourth Council of Toledo, held in 633, a
synod of great authority in the Church, ordained
that no one should be compelled against his will to
make a profession of the Christian faith. Be it remembered
that this Council was composed of all
the Bishops of Spain, that it was assembled in a
<pb n="228"/><anchor id="Pg228"/>
country and at a time in which the Church held almost
unlimited sway, and among a people who
have been represented as the most fanatical and
intolerant of all Europe.
</p>

<p>
Perhaps no man can be considered a fairer representative
of the age in which he lived than St.
Bernard, the illustrious Abbot of Clairvaux. He
was the embodiment of the spirit of the Middle
Ages. His life is the key that discloses to us what
degree of toleration prevailed in those days. Having
heard that a fanatical preacher was stimulating
the people to deeds of violence against the Jews
as the enemies of Christianity, St. Bernard raised
his eloquent voice against him, and rescued those
persecuted people from the danger to which they
were exposed.
</p>

<p>
Pope Innocent III. in the Thirteenth Century
promulgated the following Decree in behalf of the
Hebrews: <q>Let no Jew be <emph>constrained</emph> to receive
baptism, and he that will not consent to be baptized,
let him not be molested. Let no one unjustly
seize their property, disturb their feasts, or lay
waste their cemeteries.</q>
</p>

<p>
Other succeeding Pontiffs, notably Gregory IX.
and Innocent IV., issued similar instructions.
</p>

<p>
Not to cite too many examples, let me quote
for you only the beautiful letter addressed by
Fenelon, Archbishop of Cambray, to the son of
King James II. of England. This letter not only
reflects the sentiments of his own heart, but
formularizes in this particular the decrees of the
Church, of which he was a distinguished ornament.
<q>Above all,</q> he writes, <q>never force your
subjects to change their religion. No human
power can reach the impenetrable recess of the
free will of the heart. Violence can never persuade
men; it serves only to make hypocrites.
<pb n="229"/><anchor id="Pg229"/>
Grant civil liberty to all, not in approving everything
as indifferent, but in tolerating with patience
whatever Almighty God tolerates, and endeavoring
to convert men by mild persuasion.</q><note place='foot'>Vie de Fenelon.</note>
</p>

<p>
It is true, indeed, that the Catholic Church
spares no pains and stops at no sacrifice in order
to induce mankind to embrace her faith. Otherwise
she would be recreant to her sacred mission.
But she scorns to exercise any undue influence in
her efforts to convert souls.
</p>

<p>
The only argument she would use, is the argument
of reason and persuasion; the only tribunal
to which she would summon you, is the tribunal of
conscience; the only weapon she would wield, is
<q>the Sword of the Spirit, which is the Word of
God.</q> It is well known that the superior advantages
of our female academies throughout the country
lead many of our dissenting brethren to send
their daughters to these institutions. It is also
well known that so warm is the affection which
these young ladies entertain for their religious
teachers, so hallowed is the atmosphere they
breathe within these seats of learning, that they
often beg to embrace a religion which fosters so
much piety and which produces lilies so fragrant
and so pure. Do the sisters take advantage of
this influence in the cause of proselytism? By no
means. So delicate is their regard for the religious
conscience of their pupils, that they rarely
consent to have these young ladies baptized till,
after being thoroughly instructed in all the doctrines
of the Church, they have obtained the free
permission of their parents or guardians.
</p>

<p>
The Church is, indeed, intolerant in this sense,
that she can never confound truth with error; nor
can she admit that any man is conscientiously
<pb n="230"/><anchor id="Pg230"/>
free to reject the truth when its claims are convincingly
brought home to the mind. Many Protestants
seem to be very much disturbed by some
such argument as this: Catholics are very ready
now to proclaim freedom of conscience, because
they are in the minority. When they once succeed
in getting the upper hand in numbers and
power they will destroy this freedom, because
their faith teaches them to tolerate no doctrine
other than the Catholic. It is, then, a matter of
absolute necessity for us that they should never
be allowed to get this advantage.
</p>

<p>
Now, in all this, there is a great mistake, which
comes from not knowing the Catholic doctrine in
its fulness. I shall not lay it down myself, lest
it seem to have been gotten up for the occasion.
I shall quote the great theologian Becanus, who
taught the doctrine of the schools of Catholic
Theology at the time when the struggle was hottest
between Catholicity and Protestantism. He
says that religious liberty may be tolerated by a
ruler when it would do more harm to the state
or to the community to repress it. The ruler
may even enter into a compact in order to secure
to his subjects this freedom in religious matters;
and when once a compact is made it must be
observed absolutely in every point, just as every
other lawful and honest contract.<note place='foot'>Becanus,
de Virtutibus Theologicis, c. 16, quæst. 4, No. 2.</note> This is the
true Catholic teaching on this point, according
to Becanus and all Catholic theologians. So that
if Catholics should gain the majority in a community
where freedom of conscience is already
secured to all by law, their very religion obliges
them to respect the rights thus acquired by their
fellow-citizens. What danger can there be, then,
for Protestants, if Catholics should be in the majority
<pb n="231"/><anchor id="Pg231"/>
here? Their apprehensions are the result
of vain fears, which no honest mind ought any
longer to harbor.
</p>

<p>
The Church has not only respected the conscience
of the people in embracing the religion
of their choice, but she has also defended their
<emph>civil</emph> rights and liberties against the encroachments
of temporal sovereigns. One of the popular
errors that have taken possession of some
minds in our times is that in former days the
Church was leagued with princes for the oppression
of the people. This is a base calumny, which
a slight acquaintance with ecclesiastical history
would soon dispel.
</p>

<p>
The truth is, the most unrelenting enemies of
the Church have been the princes of this world,
and so-called Christians princes, too.
</p>

<p>
The conflict between Church and State has
never died out, because the Church has felt it to
be her duty, in every age, to raise her voice
against the despotic and arbitrary measures of
princes. Many of them chafed under the salutary
discipline of the Church. They wished to be rid of
her yoke. They desired to be governed by no law
except the law of their licentious passions and
boundless ambitions. And as a Protestant American
reviewer<note place='foot'>Dr. Brownson, who was
then a Protestant.</note> well said about forty years ago, it was
a blessing of Providence that there was a spiritual
Power on earth that could stand like a wall of brass
against the tyranny of earthly sovereigns and say
to them: <q>Thus far you shall go, and no farther,
and here you shall break your swelling waves</q> of
passion; a Power that could say to them what
John said to Herod: <q>This thing is not lawful
for thee;</q> a Power that pointed the finger of
reproof to them, even when the sword was pointed
<pb n="232"/><anchor id="Pg232"/>
to her own neck, and that said to them what
Nathan said to David: <q>Thou art the man.</q> She
told princes that if the people have their obligations
they have their rights, too; that if the subject
must render to Cæsar the things that are
Cæsar's, Cæsar must render to God the things that
art God's.
</p>

<p>
Yes; the Church, while pursuing her Divine mission
of leading souls to God, has ever been the
defender of the people's rights.
</p>

<p>
St. Ambrose, Archbishop of Milan, affords us a
striking instance of the strenuous efforts made by
the Catholic Church in vindicating the interests
of the citizen against the oppression of rulers.
</p>

<p>
A portion of the people of Thessalonica had
committed an outrage against the just authority
of the Emperor Theodosius. The offence of those
citizens was indeed most reprehensible; but the
Emperor requited the insult offered to him by a
shocking and disproportioned act of retribution,
which has left an indelible stain upon his otherwise
excellent character. The inhabitants were
assembled together for the ostensible purpose of
witnessing a chariot race, and at a given signal
the soldiery fell upon the people and involved
men, women and children in an indiscriminate
massacre, to the number of about seven thousand.
Some time after the Emperor presented himself
at the Cathedral of Milan; but the intrepid Prelate
told him that his hands were dripping with the
blood of his subjects, and forbade him entrance
to the church till he had made all the reparation
in his power to the afflicted people of Thessalonica.
</p>

<p>
People affect to be shocked at the sentence of
ex-communication occasionally inflicted by the
Church on evil-doers. Here is an instance of this
penalty. Who can complain of it as being too
<pb n="233"/><anchor id="Pg233"/>
severe? It was a salutary punishment and the
only one that could bring rulers to a sense of duty.
</p>

<p>
The greatest bulwark of civil liberty is the
famous <hi rend='italic'>Magna Charta</hi>. It is the foundation not
only of British, but also of American constitutional
freedom. Among other blessings contained
in this instrument it establishes trial by jury and
the right of <hi rend='italic'>Habeas Corpus</hi>, and provides that
there shall be no taxation without representation.
</p>

<p>
Who were the framers of this memorable charter?
Archbishop Langton, of Canterbury, and
the Catholic Barons of England. On the plains of
Runnymede, in 1215, they compelled King John
to sign that paper which was the death-blow to his
arbitrary power and the cornerstone of constitutional
government.
</p>

<p>
Turning to our own country, it is with no small
degree of satisfaction that I point to the State of
Maryland as the cradle of civil and religious
liberty and the <q>land of the sanctuary.</q> Of the
thirteen original American Colonies, Maryland
was the only one settled by Catholics. She was,
also, the only one that raised aloft over her fair
lands the banner of liberty of conscience, and that
invited the oppressed of other colonies to seek an
asylum beneath its shadow.
</p>

<p>
Lest I should be suspected of being too partial
in my praise of Maryland toleration, I shall take
most of my historical facts from Bancroft, a New
England Protestant clergyman.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Note</hi>&mdash;The first edition of Bancroft's History was
published in 1834. From that date till nearly half a century afterward
upwards of twenty editions were issued, all of which retain
the passages I have cited on Maryland toleration. Early in
the 80s a new edition was given out, which omits or abridges
some of the passages quoted in this chapter. I may add that
all of Bancroft's eulogies of Lord Baltimore's benevolent administration
are borne out by the original documents, and by
McMahon, Bozman and McSherry, and other historians of
Maryland.
</quote>

<pb n="234"/><anchor id="Pg234"/>

<p>
Leonard Calvert, the brother of Lord Baltimore
and the leader of the Catholic colony, having
sailed from England in the <hi rend='italic'>Ark</hi> and the
<hi rend='italic'>Dove</hi>,
reached his destination on the Potomac in March,
1634.
</p>

<p>
<q>The Catholics took quiet possession of the
little place, and religious liberty obtained a home,
<emph>its only home</emph> in the wide world, at the humble
village which bore the name of St. Mary.</q><note place='foot'>Bancroft's
<q>History of the United States,</q> Vol. I., ch. vii.
20th Edition, 1864.</note>
</p>

<p>
<q>The foundation of the colony of Maryland
was peacefully and happily laid. Within six
months it had advanced more than Virginia had
done in as many years.... But far more memorable
was the character of the Maryland institutions.
Every other country in the world had persecuting
laws; but through the benign administration
of the government of that province, no person
professing to believe in Jesus Christ was permitted
to be molested on account of religion. Under the
munificence and superintending mildness of Lord
Baltimore, a dreary wilderness was soon quickened
with the swarming life and activity of prosperous
settlements; the Roman Catholics who were oppressed
by the laws of England were sure to find
a peaceful asylum in the quiet harbors of the
Chesapeake; and there <emph>too, Protestants were
sheltered against Protestant intolerance</emph>. Such
were the beautiful auspices under which Maryland
started into being.... Its history is the history
of benevolence, gratitude and toleration.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Maryland was the abode of happiness and
liberty. Conscience was without restraint. A
mild and liberal proprietary conceded every
measure which the welfare of the colony required;
domestic union, a happy concert between all the
branches of government, an increasing emigration,
<pb n="235"/><anchor id="Pg235"/>
a productive commerce, a fertile soil, which heaven
had richly favored with rivers and deep bays,
united to perfect the scene of colonial felicity.
Ever intent on advancing the interests of his
colony, Lord Baltimore invited the Puritans of
Massachusetts to emigrate to Maryland, offering
them lands and privileges and free liberty of religion;
but Gibbons, to whom he had forwarded the
commission, was so wholly tutored in the New
England discipline, that he would not advance the
wishes of the Irish Peer, and so the invitation was
declined.</q><note place='foot'>Bancroft's <q>History
of the United States,</q> Vol. I., ch. vii.</note>
</p>

<p>
On the 2d of April, 1649, the General Assembly
of Maryland passed the following Act, which will
reflect unfading glory on that State as long as
liberty is cherished in the hearts of men.
</p>

<p>
<q>Whereas, the enforcing of conscience in matters
of religion hath frequently fallen out to be of
dangerous consequence in those commonwealths
where it has been practiced, and for the more quiet
and peaceable government of this province, and the
better to preserve mutual love and unity amongst
the inhabitants, no person whatsoever within this
province professing to believe in Jesus Christ shall
from henceforth be anyways troubled or molested
for his or her religion, nor in the free exercise
thereof, nor anyway compelled to the belief or exercise
of any other religion against his or her consent.</q><note place='foot'>Bancroft's
<q>History of the United States,</q> Vol. I., ch. vii.
Vide Bacon's Laws.</note>
</p>

<p>
Upon this noble statute Bancroft makes the following
candid and judicious comment: <q>The design
of the law of Maryland was to protect freedom
of conscience; and some years after it had
been confirmed the apologist of Lord Baltimore
could assert that his government had never given
<pb n="236"/><anchor id="Pg236"/>
disturbance to any person in Maryland for matter
of religion; that the colonists enjoyed freedom
of conscience, not less than freedom of person and
estate, as amply as ever any people in any place
of the world. The disfranchised friends of Prelacy
from Massachusetts and the Puritans from
Virginia were welcomed to equal liberty of conscience
and political rights in the Roman Catholic
province of Maryland.</q><note place='foot'>Ibid.</note>
</p>

<p>
Five years later, when the Puritans gained the
ascendency in Maryland, they were guilty of the
infamous ingratitude of disfranchising the very
Catholic settlers by whom they had been so hospitably
entertained. They <q>had neither the gratitude
to respect the rights of the government by
which they had been received and fostered, nor
magnanimity to continue the toleration to which
alone they were indebted for their residence in the
colony. An act concerning religion forbade liberty
of conscience to be extended to <q>Popery,</q>
<q>Prelacy,</q> or <q>licentiousness of opinion.</q></q><note place='foot'>Bancroft's
<q>History of the United States,</q> Vol. I., ch. vii.
Vide Bacon's Laws.</note>
</p>

<p>
I shall also quote from <q>Maryland, the History
of a Palatinate,</q> by William Hand Browne.<note place='foot'>Boston,
Houghton, Mifflin &amp; Co., 1884.</note> Mr.
Browne was a graduate of the University of Maryland.
For several years he was editor of the Maryland
Archives, and of the Maryland Historical Society.
He became afterward Professor of English
Literature in the Johns Hopkins University. He
devoted his long life to the Colonial history of
Maryland, and is justly recognized as a standard
authority on that subject. I may add that he cannot
be suspected of undue partiality, as he was not
a member of the Catholic Church.
</p>

<pb n="237"/><anchor id="Pg237"/>

<p>
Speaking of Calvert, the Proprietary of the
Maryland Colony, the author remarks that <q rend='pre'>while
as yet there was no spot in Christendom where religious
belief was free, and when even the Commons
of England had openly declared against toleration,
Calvert founded a community wherein no
man was to be molested for his faith. At a time
when absolutism had struck down representative
government in England and it was doubtful if a
Parliament of freemen would ever meet again, he
founded a community in which no laws were to be
made without the consent of the freemen.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='post'>The <hi rend='italic'>Ark</hi> and the
<hi rend='italic'>Dove</hi> were names of happy
omen. The one saved from the general wreck the
germs of political liberty; and the other bore the
olive branch of religious peace.</q><note place='foot'>Ibid., Chapter iii.</note>
</p>

<p>
When the rule of the Catholic Proprietary was
overthrown and the Puritans had gained the ascendency
in the Province, the new Commissioners
issued writs of election to a general assembly&mdash;writs
of a tenor hitherto unknown in Maryland.
No man of the Roman Catholic faith could be
elected as a burgess, or even cast a vote. The Assembly
obtained by this process of selection, justified
its choice. It at once repealed the Toleration
Act of 1649 and created a new one, more to its
mind, which also bore the title: <q>An Act concerning
Religion,</q> but it was toleration with a difference.
It provided that none who professed the Popish
religion should be protected in the Province,
but were to be restrained from the exercise thereof.
</p>

<p>
For Protestants it provided that no one professing
faith in Christ was to be restrained from the
exercise of his religion, <q>provided that this liberty
be not extended to Popery, or Prelacy, nor to such
as under the profession of Christ, hold forth and
<pb n="238"/><anchor id="Pg238"/>
practice licentiousness. That is, with the exception
of the Roman Catholics and churchmen, together
with the Brownists, Quakers, Anabaptists, and
other miscellaneous Protestant sects, all others
might profess their faith without molestation.</q><note place='foot'>Ibid.,
Chap. v.</note>
</p>

<p>
After the overthrow of the Puritan authority,
and the advent to power of the members of the
Church of England, the second act of the Assembly
was to make the Protestant Episcopal Church the
established church of the Province.
</p>

<p>
The Act imposed an annual tax of forty pounds
of tobacco per poll on all taxables for the purpose
of building churches, and maintaining the clergy.
In 1702 it was re-enacted with a toleration clause:
<q>Protestant Dissenters and Quakers were exempted
from the penalties and disabilities, and might
have separate meeting-houses, provided that they
paid their forty pounds per poll to support the Established
Church. As for the <q>Papists,</q> it is needless
to say that there was no exemption nor license
for them.</q><note place='foot'>Ibid., Chap. xi.</note>
</p>

<p>
The author then sets before us the three kinds of
toleration, like three portraits, so that their distinctive
features appear in bold relief.
</p>

<p>
<q>We may now,</q> he says, <q>place side by side the
three tolerations of Maryland.</q>
</p>

<p>
The toleration of the (Catholic) Proprietaries
lasted fifty years, and under it all believers in
Christ were equal before the law, and all support
to churches or ministers was voluntary.
</p>

<p>
The Puritan toleration lasted six years, and included
all but Papists, Prelatists and those who
held objectional doctrines.
</p>

<p>
The Anglican toleration lasted eighty years, and
had glebes and churches for the Establishment,
connivance for Dissenters, the penal laws for Catholics,
and for all, the forty per poll.
</p>

<pb n="239"/><anchor id="Pg239"/>

<p>
In fact, an additional turn was given to the
screw in this year; the oath of <q>abhorrency,</q> a
more offensive form of the oath of supremacy, being
required, beside the oath of allegiance, and for
one thing, no Catholic attorney was allowed to
practise in the Province.<note place='foot'>Ibid. Chap. xi.</note>
</p>

<p>
When the members of the Constitutional Convention
declared in 1787, that <q>Congress shall
make no law respecting an establishment of religion,
or prohibiting the free exercise thereof,</q> it is
worthy of note that they were echoing the sentiments,
and even repeating the language of the
Maryland Assembly of 1649, which declared that
<q>No person whatsoever within this Province, professing
to believe in Jesus Christ, shall from henceforth
be any ways molested for his or her religion,
nor in the free exercise thereof.</q>
</p>

<p>
We may therefore affirm that Lord Baltimore's
Toleration Act of 1649 was the bright dawn that
ushered in the noon-day sun of freedom in 1787.
And we have every reason to believe that the Proprietary's
charter of liberty with its attendant
blessings, served as an example, an incentive, and
an inspiration to some at least of the framers of
the Constitution, to extend over the new Republic,
the precious boon of civil and religious liberty.
</p>

<p>
It is proper to also observe that the Act of 1649
was not a new declaration of religious freedom on
the part of Lord Baltimore's administration, but
was a solemn affirmation of the toleration granted
by the Catholic Proprietary from the beginning of
the Settlement in 1634.
</p>

<p>
I will close this subject in the words of a distinguished
member of the Maryland Historical Society:
<q>Higher than all titles and badges of honor, and
more exalted than royal nobility is the imperishable
<pb n="240"/><anchor id="Pg240"/>
distinction which the passage of this broad
and liberal Act won for Maryland, and for the
members of that never-to-be-forgotten session, and
sacred forever be the hallowed spot which gave it
birth.</q><note place='foot'>James Walter Thomas.</note>
</p>

<p>
What shall I say of the prominent part that was
taken by distinguished representatives of the Catholic
Church in the cause of our American Independence?
What shall I say of Charles Carroll of
Carrollton, who, at the risk of sacrificing his rich
estates, signed the Declaration of Independence;
of Rev. John Carroll, afterward the first Archbishop
of Baltimore, who, with his cousin Charles
Carroll and Benjamin Franklin, was sent by Congress
to Canada to secure the co-operation of the
people of that province in the struggle for liberty;
of Kosciusko, Lafayette, Pulaski, Barry and a host
of other Catholic heroes who labored so effectually
in the same glorious cause? American patriots
without number the Church has nursed in her
bosom; a traitor, never.
</p>

<p>
The Father of his Country was not unmindful of
these services. Shortly after his election to the
Presidency, replying<note place='foot'>The original
of Washington's reply is still preserved in the
Archives of the Baltimore Cathedral.</note> to an address of his Catholic
fellow-citizens, he uses the following language: <q>I
presume that your fellow-citizens will not forget
the patriotic part which you took in the accomplishment
of their revolution, and the establishment
of their government; or the important assistance
they received from a nation in which the Roman
Catholic faith is professed.</q>
</p>

<p>
And the Catholics of our generation have nobly
emulated the patriotism and the spirit of toleration
exhibited by their ancestors. They can
<pb n="241"/><anchor id="Pg241"/>
neither be accused of disloyalty nor of intolerance
to their dissenting brethren. In more than one
instance of our nation's history our churches
have been desecrated and burned to the ground;
our convents have been invaded and destroyed;
our clergy have been exposed to insult and
violence. These injuries have been inflicted on
us by incendiary mobs animated by hatred of
Catholicism. Yet, in spite of these provocations,
our Catholic citizens, though wielding an immense
numerical influence in the localities where they
suffered, have never retaliated. It is in a spirit
of just pride that we can affirm that hitherto in
the United States no Protestant house of worship
or educational institution has been destroyed, nor
violence offered to a Protestant minister by those
who profess the Catholic faith. God grant that
such may always be our record!
</p>

<p>
It is just because the Church has ever resisted
the tyranny of kings, in their encroachments on
the sacred rights of conscience, that she has always
been the victim of royal persecution. In
every age, in the language of the Psalmist, <q>the
kings of the earth rose up, and the princes assembled
together against the Lord and against
His Christ.</q><note place='foot'>Ps.
ii.</note> The brightest and most thrilling
pages of ecclesiastical history are those which
record the sufferings of Popes and Prelates at
the hands of temporal sovereigns for conscience'
and for justice' sake.
</p>

<p>
Take, for instance, St. John Chrysostom, the
great Archbishop of Constantinople in the fifth
century, and the idol of the people. He had the
courage, like John the Baptist, to raise his eloquent
voice against the lasciviousness of the
court, and particularly against the Empress Eudoxia,
<pb n="242"/><anchor id="Pg242"/>
who ruled like another Jezabel. He was
banished from his See, treated with the utmost
indignity by the soldiers, and died in exile from
sheer exhaustion and ill-treatment.
</p>

<p>
Witness Pope Gregory VII., the fearless Hildebrand,
in his life-long struggle with the German
Emperor, Henry IV. Gregory directed all the
energies of his great mind towards reforming the
abuses which had crept into the church of France
and Germany in the eleventh century. In those
days the Emperor of Germany assumed the right
of naming or appointing Bishops throughout his
Empire. This sacred office was commonly bestowed
on very unworthy candidates, and very
often put up at auction, to be sold to the highest
bidder, as is now the case with the schismatic
Greek church in Turkey.
</p>

<p>
These Bishops too often repaid their imperial
benefactor by pandering to his passions and by
the most servile flattery. The intrepid Pope partially
succeeded in uprooting the evil, though the
effort cost him his life. The Emperor invaded
Rome and drove Gregory from his See, who died
uttering these words with his last breath: <q>I have
loved justice and hated iniquity, and therefore
I die in exile.</q>
</p>

<p>
For the same cause Thomas à Becket, Archbishop
of Canterbury, was slain at the altar by
the hired assassins of Henry II., of England.
</p>

<p>
Observe how Pius VII. was treated by the first
Napoleon in the beginning of the present century.
The day-dream of Napoleon was to be master of
Europe, and to place his brothers and friends
on the thrones of the continent, that they might
revolve, like so many satellites, around his throne
in France. Napoleon makes two demands on the
venerable Pontiff: First&mdash;That he dissolve the
<pb n="243"/><anchor id="Pg243"/>
marriage which had been contracted between the
Emperor's brother, Jerome, and Miss Patterson,
of Baltimore. His ostensible reason for having
the marriage dissolved was because Miss Patterson
was a Protestant, but his real motive was
to secure a royal bride for his brother instead
of an American lady. Second&mdash;That he close his
ports against the commerce of England, with
which nation Napoleon was then at war, and make
common cause with the Emperor against his
enemies. The Pope rejected both demands. He
told the Emperor that the Church held all marriages
performed by her as indissoluble, even
when one of the parties was not a Catholic; and
that, as the common father of Christendom, he
could close his port against no Christian power.
For refusing to comply with this second demand
the Pope was arrested and sent into exile, where
he lingered for years.
</p>

<p>
At this very moment the old conflict between
the Church and despotic governments is raging
fiercely throughout Europe. The scene enacted by
John and Herod is today reproduced in almost
every kingdom of the old world. It is the old
fight between brute force and the God-given rights
of conscience.
</p>

<p>
In Russia we see the Bishop of Plock exiled for
life from his See to Siberia. His only offence is
his refusal to acknowledge that the Emperor Alexander
is the head of the Christian Church.
</p>

<p>
If we pass over into Italy we see religious men
and women driven from their homes; their houses
and libraries confiscated&mdash;libraries which pious
and learned men had been collecting and consulting
for ages. The only crime of those religious
is that they have not the power to resist brute
force.
</p>

<pb n="244"/><anchor id="Pg244"/>

<p>
Cross the Alps into France and there you will see
that many-headed monster, the Commune, assassinating
the Archbishop of Paris and his clergy,
solely because he and they were the representatives
of law and order.
</p>

<p>
In the Republic of Switzerland Bishop Mermillod
is expelled from Geneva without the slightest
charge adduced against his character as a citizen
and a Christian Prelate. Faithful clergymen are
deprived by the government of their parochial
rights and renegade Priests are intruded in their
place. The shepherd is driven away and wolves
lay waste the fold.
</p>

<p>
Go to Prussia; what do you behold there? A
Prime Minister flushed with his recent victories
over France. He is not content with seeing his
master wear the imperial crown of Germany; he
wants him to wear also the tiara of the Pope.
Bismarck, like Aman, the minister of King Assuerus,
is not satisfied with being second in the
kingdom so long as Mardochai, that is the Church,
refuses to bow down and worship him.
</p>

<p>
He fines the venerable Archbishop of Gnesen-Posen
and other Prussian Prelates again and
again, sells their furniture and finally sends them
to prison for a protracted period. St. John Chrysostom
beautifully remarks that St. Paul, elevated
to the third heaven, was glorious to contemplate;
but that far more glorious is Paul buried in the
dungeons of Rome. I can say in like manner, of
Archbishop Ledochowski of Posen, that he was
conspicuous in the Vatican Council among his
peers; but he was still more conspicuous sitting
solitary in his Prussian prison.
</p>

<p>
The loyalty of the Prussian clergy is above reproach.
The Bishops are imprisoned because they
insist on the right of educating students for the
<pb n="245"/><anchor id="Pg245"/>
ministry, ordaining and appointing clergy, without
consulting the government. They are denied
a right which in this country is possessed by Free
Masons and every other human organization in
the land.
</p>

<p>
Perhaps a simple illustration will present to
you in a clearer light the odious character of the
penal laws to which I have alluded. Suppose the
government of the United States were to issue a
general order requiring the clergy of the various
Christian denominations to be educated in government
establishments, forcing them to take an
oath before entering on the duties of the ministry,
and forbidding the ecclesiastical authorities to appoint
or remove any clergyman without permission
of the civil power at Washington. Would not
the American people rise up in their might before
they would submit to have fetters so galling
forged on their conscience? And yet this is precisely
the odious legislation which the Prussian
government is enacting against the Church. And
the Catholic Church, in resisting these laws, is
not only fighting her own battles, but she is contending
for the principle of freedom of conscience
everywhere.
</p>

<p>
But, thank God, we live in a country where liberty
of conscience is respected, and where the civil
constitution holds over us the ægis of her protection,
without intermeddling with ecclesiastical
affairs. From my heart, I say: America, with all
thy faults, I love thee still. Perhaps at this moment
there is no nation on the face of the earth
where the Church is less trammelled, and where
she has more liberty to carry out her sublime
destiny than in these United States.
</p>

<p>
For my part, I much prefer the system which
prevails in this country, where the temporal needs
<pb n="246"/><anchor id="Pg246"/>
of the Church are supplied by voluntary contributions
of the faithful, to the system which obtains
in some Catholic countries of Europe, where
the Church is supported by the government, thereby
making feeble reparation for the gross injustice
it has done to the Church by its former wholesale
confiscation of ecclesiastical property. And
the Church pays dearly for this indemnity, for
she has to bear the perpetual attempts at interference
and the vexatious enactments of the civil
power, which aims at making her wholly dependent
upon itself.
</p>

<p>
Some years ago, on my return from Rome, in
company with the late Archbishop Spalding I
paid a visit to the Bishop of Annecy, in Savoy.
I was struck by the splendor of his palace and
saw a sentinel at the door, placed there by the
French government as a guard of honor. But
the venerable Bishop soon disabused me of my
favorable impressions. He told me that he was
in a state of gilded slavery. I cannot, said he,
build as much as a sacristy without obtaining
permission of the government.
</p>

<p>
I do not wish to see the day when the Church
will invoke or receive any government aid to build
our churches, or to pay the salary of our clergy,
for the government may then begin to dictate to
us what doctrines we ought to preach. If it is a
great wrong to muzzle the press, it is a greater
wrong to muzzle the pulpit. No amount of State
subsidy would compensate for the evils resulting
from the Government censorship of the Gospel, and
the suppression of Apostolic freedom in proclaiming
it. St. Paul exults in the declaration that,
though he is personally in chains, the word of God
is not enchained.<note place='foot'>II. Tim. ii. 9.</note>
</p>

<pb n="247"/><anchor id="Pg247"/>

<p>
And moreover, in proportion as State patronage
would increase, the sympathy and aid of the faithful
would diminish.
</p>

<p>
May the happy condition of things now existing
among us always continue, in which the relations
between the clergy and the people will be
direct and immediate, in which Bishops and
Priests will bestow upon their spiritual children
their voluntary labors, their tender solicitude,
their paternal affection, and pour out like water
their hearts' blood, if necessary; and in which
they will receive in return the free-will offerings&mdash;the
devotion and gratitude of a filial people.
</p>

</div>

<pb n="248"/><anchor id="Pg248"/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc' level1='Chapter XVIII. Charges of Religious Persecution.'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='Chapter XVIII.'/>
<head type='sub'>Chapter XVIII.</head>
<head>Charges of Religious Persecution.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head>I. The Spanish Inquisition.</head>

<p>
But did not the Spanish Inquisition exercise
enormous cruelties against heretics and
Jews? I am not the apologist of the Spanish
Inquisition, and I have no desire to palliate
or excuse the excesses into which that tribunal
may at times have fallen. From my heart I abhor
and denounce every species of violence, and
injustice, and persecution of which the Spanish
Inquisition may have been guilty. And in raising
my voice against coercion for conscience' sake I
am expressing not only my own sentiments, but
those of every Catholic Priest and layman in
the land.
</p>

<p>
Our Catholic ancestors, for the last three hundred
years, have suffered so much for freedom
of conscience that they would rise up in judgment
against us were we to become the advocates and
defenders of religious persecution. We would be
a disgrace to our sires were we to trample on
the principle of liberty which they held dearer
than life.
</p>

<p>
When I denounce the cruelties of the Inquisition
I am not standing aloof from the Church,
<pb n="249"/><anchor id="Pg249"/>
but I am treading in her footprints. Bloodshed
and persecution form no part of the creed of the
Catholic Church. So much does she abhor the
shedding of blood that a man becomes disqualified
to serve as a minister at her altars who, by
act or counsel, voluntarily sheds the blood of another.
Before you can convict the Church of intolerance
you must first bring forward some authentic
act of her Popes or Councils sanctioning
the policy of vengeance. In all my readings I
have yet to find one decree of hers advocating
torture or death for conscience' sake. She is indeed
intolerant of error; but her only weapons
against error are those pointed out by St. Paul
to Timothy: <q>Preach the word; be instant in
season, out of season; reprove, entreat; rebuke
with all patience and doctrine.</q><note place='foot'>II. Tim. iv. 2.</note>
</p>

<p>
But you will tell me: Were not the authors of
the Inquisition children of the Church, and did
they not exercise their enormities in her name?
Granted. But I ask you: Is it just or fair to
hold the Church responsible for those acts of her
children which she disowns? You do not denounce
liberty as mockery because many crimes are committed
in her name; neither do you hold a father
accountable for the sins of his disobedient children.
</p>

<p>
We should also bear in mind that the Spaniards
were not the only people who have proscribed
men for the exercise of their religious belief. If
we calmly study the history of other nations our
enmity towards Spain will considerably relax,
and we shall have to reserve for her neighbors a
portion of our indignation. No impartial student
of history will deny that the leaders of the reformed
religions, whenever they gained the ascendency,
<pb n="250"/><anchor id="Pg250"/>
exercised violence toward those who
differed from them in faith. I mention this not
by way of recrimination, nor in palliation of the
proscriptions of the Spanish government; for one
offence is not justified by another. My object is
merely to show that <q>they who live in glass houses
should not throw stones;</q> and that it is not honest
to make Spain the scapegoat, bearing alone
on her shoulders the odium of religious intolerance.
</p>

<p>
It should not be forgotten that John Calvin
burned Michael Servetus at the stake for heresy;
that the arch-reformer not only avowed but also
justified the deed in his writings; and that he
established in Geneva an Inquisition for the punishment
of refractory Christians.
</p>

<p>
It should also be remembered that Luther advocated
the most merciless doctrine towards the
Jews. According to his apologist Seckendorf, the
German Reformer said that their synagogues
ought to be destroyed, their houses pulled down,
their prayer-books, and even the books of the Old
Testament, to be taken from them. Their rabbis
ought to be forbidden to teach and be compelled
to gain their livelihood by hard labor.
</p>

<p>
It should also be borne in mind that Henry
VIII. and his successors for many generations inflicted
fines, imprisonment and death on thousands
of their subjects for denying the spiritual supremacy
of the temporal sovereign. This galling Inquisition
lasted for nearly three hundred years,
and the severity of its decrees scarcely finds a
parallel in the Spanish Inquisition. Prescott
avows that the administration of Elizabeth was
<q>not a whit less despotic and scarcely less sanguinary
than</q><note place='foot'><q>Ferdinand and Isabella,</q>
Vol. III., p. 202.</note> that of Isabella. The clergy of
<pb n="251"/><anchor id="Pg251"/>
Ireland, under Cromwell, were ordered, under
pain of death, to quit their country, and theological
students were obliged to pursue their studies
in foreign seminaries. Any Priest who dared to
return to his native country forfeited his life.
Whoever harbored a Priest suffered death, and
they who knew his hiding-place and did not reveal
it to the Inquisitors had both their ears cut
off.
</p>

<p>
At this very moment not only in England, but
in Ireland, Scotland and Holland, Protestants are
worshiping in some of the churches erected by
the piety of our Catholic forefathers and wrested
from them by violence.
</p>

<p>
Observe, also, that in all these instances the
persecutions were inflicted by the express authority
of the <emph>founders</emph> and <emph>heads</emph> of Protestant
churches.
</p>

<p>
The Puritans of New England inflicted summary
vengeance on those who were rash enough
to differ from them in religion. In Massachusetts
<q>the Quakers were whipped, branded, had
their ears cut off, their tongues bored with hot
irons, and were banished upon pain of death in
case of their return and actually executed upon
the gallows.</q><note place='foot'>Blue Laws.</note>
</p>

<p>
Who is ignorant of the number of innocent creatures
that suffered death in the same State on
the ridiculous charge of witchcraft toward the
end of the seventeenth century? Well does it become
their descendants to taunt Catholics with
the horrors of the Spanish Inquisition!
</p>

<p>
In the religious riots of Philadelphia in 1844
Catholic churches were burned down in the name
of Protestantism and private houses were sacked.
I was informed by an eyewitness that owners of
<pb n="252"/><anchor id="Pg252"/>
houses were obliged to mark on their doors these
words, <hi rend='italic'>This house belongs to Protestants</hi>, in order
to save their property from the infuriated incendiaries.
For these acts I never heard of any retaliation
on the part of Catholics, and I hope I
never shall, no matter how formidable may be
their numbers and tempting the provocation.
</p>

<p>
In spite of the boasted toleration of our times,
it cannot be denied that there still lurks a spirit
of inquisition, which does not, indeed, vent itself
in physical violence, but is, nevertheless, most
galling to its victims. How many persons have
I met in the course of my ministry who were ostracized
by their kindred and friends, driven from
home, nay, disinherited by their parents, for the
sole crime of carrying out the very shibboleth of
Protestantism&mdash;the exercise of private judgment,
and of obeying the dictates of their conscience, by
embracing the Catholic faith! Is not this the most
exquisite torture that can be inflicted on refined
natures?
</p>

<p>
Ah! there is an imprisonment more lonely than
the dungeon; it is the imprisonment of our most
cherished thoughts in our own hearts, without a
member of the family with whom to communicate.
</p>

<p>
There is a sword more keen than the executioner's
knife; it is the envenomed tongue of obloquy
and abuse. There is a banishment less tolerable
than exile from one's country; it is the excommunication
from the parental roof and from the
affections of those we love.
</p>

<p>
Have I a right to hold the members of the
Episcopal, Lutheran, Presbyterian and Congregationalist
churches responsible for these proscriptive
measures to which I have referred, most of
which have been authorized by their respective
<pb n="253"/><anchor id="Pg253"/>
founders and leaders? God forbid! I know full
well that these acts of cruelty form no part of
the creed of the Protestant churches. I have been
acquainted with Protestants from my youth. They
have been among my most intimate and cherished
friends, and, from my knowledge of them, I am
convinced that they would discountenance any
physical violence which would be inflicted on their
fellow-citizens on account of their religious convictions.
They would justly tell me that the persecutions
of former years of which I have spoken
should be ascribed to the peculiar and unhappy
state of society in which their ancestors lived,
rather than to the inherent principles of their religion.
</p>

<p>
For precisely the same reasons, and for reasons
still more forcible, Protestants should not reproach
the Catholic Church for the atrocities of
the Spanish Inquisition. The persecutions to
which I have alluded were for the most part perpetrated
by the founders and heads of the Protestant
churches, while the rigors of the Spanish
tribunal were inflicted by laymen and subordinate
ecclesiastics, either without the knowledge or in
spite of the protests of the Bishops of Rome.
</p>

<p>
Let us now present the Inquisition in its true
light. In the first place, the number of its victims
has been wildly exaggerated, as even Prescott
is forced to admit. The popular historian
of the Inquisition is Llorente, from whom our
American authors generally derive their information
on this subject. Now who was Llorente? He
was a degraded Priest, who was dismissed from
the Board of Inquisitors, of which he had been
Secretary. Actuated by interest and revenge, he
wrote his history at the instance of Joseph Bonaparte,
the new King of Spain, and, to please his
<pb n="254"/><anchor id="Pg254"/>
royal master he did all he could to blacken the
character of that institution. His testimony,
therefore, should be received with great reserve.
To give you one instance of his unreliability, he
quotes the historian Mariana as his authority for
saying that two thousand persons were put to
death in one year in the dioceses of Seville and
Cadiz alone. By referring to the pages of Mariana
we find that author saying that two thousand
were put to death <emph>in all Spain during the entire
administration of Torquemada, which embraced a
period of fifteen years</emph>.
</p>

<p>
Before beginning to examine the character of
this tribunal it must be clearly understood that
the Spanish Inquisition was not a purely ecclesiastical
institution, but a mixed tribunal. It was
conceived, systematized, regulated in all its procedures
and judgments, equipped with officers and
powers, and its executions, fines and confiscations
were carried out by the royal authority alone,
and not by the Church.<note place='foot'>For an impartial
account of the Inquisition, the reader is
referred to the <q>Letters on the Spanish Inquisition,</q> by the
Count de Maistre.</note>
</p>

<p>
To understand the true character of the Spanish
Inquisition, and the motives which prompted
King Ferdinand in establishing that tribunal, we
must take a glance at the internal condition of
Spain at the close of the fifteenth century. After
a struggle of eight centuries the Spanish nation
succeeded in overthrowing the Moors, and in
planting the national flag over the entire country.
At last the Cross conquered the Crescent,
and Christianity triumphed over Mahometanism.
The empire was consolidated under the joint reign
of Ferdinand and Isabella.
</p>

<p>
But there still remained elements of discord in
<pb n="255"/><anchor id="Pg255"/>
the nation. The population was composed of three
conflicting races&mdash;the Spaniards, Moors and Jews.
Perhaps the difficulties which beset our own Government
in its efforts to harmonize the white, the
Indian and the colored population, will give us
some idea of the formidable obstacles with which
the Spanish court had to contend in its efforts to
cement into one compact nation a conquering and
a conquered people of different race and religion.
</p>

<p>
The Jews and the Moors were disaffected toward
the Spanish government not only on political,
but also on religious grounds. They were suspected,
and not unjustly, of desiring to transfer
their allegiance from the King of Spain to the
King of Barbary or to the Grand Turk.
</p>

<p>
The Spanish Inquisition was accordingly
erected by King Ferdinand, less from motives
of religious zeal than from those of human
policy. It was established, not so much with the
view of preserving the Catholic faith, as of perpetuating
the integrity of his kingdom. The
Moors and Jews were looked upon not only as
enemies of the altar, but chiefly as enemies of
the throne. Catholics were upheld not for their
faith alone, but because they united faith to loyalty.
The baptized Moors and Israelites were oppressed
for their heresy because their heresy was
allied to sedition.
</p>

<p>
It must be remembered that in those days heresy,
especially if outspoken, was regarded not only
as an offence against religion, but also as a crime
against the state, and was punished accordingly.
This condition of things was not confined to Catholic
Spain, but prevailed across the sea in Protestant
England. We find Henry VIII. and his
successors pursuing the same policy in Great
Britain toward their Catholic subjects and punishing
<pb n="256"/><anchor id="Pg256"/>
Catholicism as a crime against the state,
just as Islamism and Judaism were proscribed
in Spain.
</p>

<p>
It was, therefore, rather a royal and political
than an ecclesiastical institution. The King nominated
the Inquisitors, who were equally composed
of lay and clerical officials. He dismissed
them at will. From the King, and not from the
Pope, they derived their jurisdiction, and into the
King's coffers, and not into the Pope's, went all
the emoluments accruing from fines and confiscations.
In a word, the authority of the Inquisition
began and ended with the crown.
</p>

<p>
In confirmation of these assertions I shall quote
from Ranke, a German Protestant historian, who
cannot be suspected of partiality to the Catholic
Church. <q>In the first place,</q> says this author,
<q rend='pre'>the Inquisitors were royal officers. The Kings
had the right of appointing and dismissing them....
The courts of the Inquisition were subject,
like other magistracies, to royal visitors. <q>Do you
not know,</q> said the King (to Ximenes), <q>that if
this tribunal possesses jurisdiction, it is from the
King it derives it?</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>In the second place, all the profit of the confiscations
by this court accrued to the King. These
were carried out in a very unsparing manner.
Though the <hi rend='italic'>fueros</hi> (privileges) of Aragon forbade
the King to confiscate the property of his convicted
subjects, he deemed himself exalted above
the law in matters pertaining to this court....
The proceeds of these confiscations formed a sort
of regular income for the royal exchequer. It
was even believed, and asserted from the beginning,
that the Kings had been moved to establish
and countenance this tribunal more by their hankering
<pb n="257"/><anchor id="Pg257"/>
after the wealth it confiscated than by
motives of piety.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>In the third place, it was the Inquisition, and
the Inquisition alone, that completely shut out
all extraneous interference with the state. The
sovereign had now at his disposal a tribunal from
which no grandee, no Archbishop, could withdraw
himself. As Charles knew no other means of
bringing certain punishment on the Bishops who
had taken part in the insurrection of the <hi rend='italic'>Communidades</hi>
(or communes who were struggling for
their rights and liberties), he chose to have them
judged by the Inquisition....</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>It was in spirit and tendency a political institution.
<emph>The Pope had an interest in thwarting it,
and he did so</emph>; but the King had an interest in
constantly upholding it.</q><note place='foot'><q>The
Ottoman and Spanish Empires,</q> by Leopold Ranke.</note>
</p>

<p>
That the Inquisition acted independently of the
Holy See, and that even the Catholic hierarchy
fell under the ban of this royal tribunal, is also
apparent from the following fact: After the convening
of the Council of Trent, Bartholomew Caranza,
Archbishop of Toledo, was arrested by the
Inquisition on a charge of heresy, and his release
from prison could not be obtained either by the
interposition of Pius IV. or the remonstrance of
the Council.
</p>

<p>
It is true that Sixtus IV., yielding to the importunities
of Queen Isabella, consented to its establishment,
being advised that it was necessary
for the preservation of order in the kingdom; but
in 1481, the year following its introduction, when
the Jews complained to him of its severity, the
same Pontiff issued a Bull against the Inquisitors,
as Prescott informs us, in which <q>he rebuked
their intemperate zeal and even threatened them
<pb n="258"/><anchor id="Pg258"/>
with deprivation.</q> He wrote to Ferdinand and
Isabella that <q>mercy towards the guilty was more
pleasing to God than the severity which they were
using.</q>
</p>

<p>
When the Pope could not eradicate the evil he
encouraged the sufferers to flee to Rome, where
they found an asylum, and where he took the fugitives
under his protection. In two years he received
four hundred and fifty refugees from
Spain. Did the Pontiff send them back, or did
he inflict vengeance on them at home? Far from
it; they were restored to all the rights of citizens.
How can we imagine that the Pope would encourage
in Spain the legalized murder of men
whom he protected from violence in his own city,
where he might have crushed them with impunity?
I can find no authenticated instance of any Pope
putting to death, in his own dominions, a single
individual for his religious belief.
</p>

<p>
Moreover, sometimes the Pope, when he could
not reach the victims, censured and excommunicated
the Inquisitor, and protected the children
of those whose property was confiscated to the
crown.
</p>

<p>
After a struggle he succeeded in preventing
the Spanish government from establishing its Inquisition
in Naples or Milan, which then belonged
to Spain, so great was his abhorence of its cruelties.
</p>

<p>
To sum up: I have endeavored to show that
the Church disavows all responsibility for the
excesses of the Spanish Inquisition, because oppression
forms no part of her creed; that these
atrocities have been grossly exaggerated; that the
Inquisition was a political tribunal; that Catholic
Prelates were amenable to its sentence as well as
Moors and Jews, and that the Popes denounced
<pb n="259"/><anchor id="Pg259"/>
and labored hard to abolish its sanguinary features.
</p>

<p>
And yet Rome has to bear all the odium of
the Inquisition!
</p>

<p>
I heartily pray that religious intolerance may
never take root in our favored land. May the
only king to force our conscience be the King of
kings; may the only prison erected among us for
the sin of unbelief or misbelief be the prison of a
troubled conscience; and may our only motive for
embracing truth be not the fear of man, but the
love of truth and of God.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head>II. What About The Massacre Of St. Bartholomew?</head>

<p>
I have no words strong enough to express my
detestation of that inhuman slaughter. It is true
that the number of its victims has been grossly
exaggerated by partisan writers, but that is no
extenuation of the crime itself. I most emphatically
assert that the Church had no act or part in
this atrocious butchery, except to deplore the event
and weep over its unhappy victims. Here are the
facts briefly presented:
</p>

<p>
First&mdash;In the reign of Charles IX. of France
the Huguenots were a formidable power and a
seditious element in that country. They were
under the leadership of Admiral Coligny, who was
plotting the overthrow of the ruling monarch.
The French King, instigated by his mother, Catherine
de Medicis, and fearing the influence of
Coligny, whom he regarded as an aspirant to the
throne, compassed his assassination, as well as
that of his followers in Paris, August 24th, 1572.
This deed of violence was followed by an indiscriminate
massacre in the French capital and
<pb n="260"/><anchor id="Pg260"/>
other cities of France by an incendiary populace,
who are easily aroused but not easily appeased.
</p>

<p>
Second&mdash;Religion had nothing to do with the
massacre. Coligny and his fellow Huguenots
were slain not on account of their creed, but exclusively
on account of their alleged treasonable
designs. If they had nothing but their Protestant
faith to render them odious to King Charles, they
would never have been molested; for, neither did
Charles nor his mother ever manifest any special
zeal for the Catholic Church nor any special aversion
to Protestantism, unless when it threatened
the throne.
</p>

<p>
Third&mdash;Immediately after the massacre Charles
despatched an envoy extraordinary to each of the
courts of Europe, conveying the startling intelligence
that the King and royal family had narrowly
escaped from a horrible conspiracy, and
that its authors had been detected and summarily
punished. The envoys, in their narration, carefully
suppressed any allusion to the indiscriminate
massacre which had taken place, but announced
the event in the following words: On
that <q>memorable night, by the destruction of a
few seditious men, the King had been delivered
from immediate danger of death, and the realm
from the perpetual terror of civil war.</q>
</p>

<p>
Pope Gregory XIII., to whom also an envoy
was sent, acting on this garbled information, ordered
a <q>Te Deum</q> to be sung, and a commemorative
medal to be struck in thanksgiving to God,
not for the massacre, of which he was utterly
ignorant, but for the preservation of the French
King from an untimely and violent death, and of
the French nation from the horrors of a civil
war.
</p>

<p>
Sismondi, a Protestant historian, tells us that
<pb n="261"/><anchor id="Pg261"/>
the Pope's nuncio in Paris was purposely kept in
ignorance of the designs of Charles; and Ranke,
in his <hi rend='italic'>History of the Civil Wars</hi>, informs us that
Charles and his mother suddenly left Paris in
order to avoid an interview with the Pope's legate,
who arrived soon after the massacre; their guilty
conscience fearing, no doubt, a rebuke from the
messenger of the Vicar of Christ, from whom
the real facts were not long concealed.
</p>

<p>
Fourth&mdash;It is scarcely necessary to vindicate
the innocence of the Bishops and clergy of France
in this transaction, as no author, how hostile soever
to the Church, has ever, to my knowledge,
accused them of any complicity in the heinous
massacre.
</p>

<p>
On the contrary, they used their best efforts
to arrest the progress of the assailants, to prevent
further bloodshed and to protect the lives of
the fugitives. More than three hundred Calvinists
were sheltered from the assassins by taking
refuge in the house of the Archbishop of Lyons.
The Bishops of Lisieux, Bordeaux, Toulouse and
of other cities offered similar protection to those
who sought safety in their homes.
</p>

<p>
Thus we see that the Church slept in tranquil
ignorance of the stormy scene until she was
aroused to a knowledge of the tempest by the
sudden uproar it created. Like her Divine Spouse
on the troubled waters, she presents herself only
to say to them: <q>Peace be still.</q>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head>III. Mary, Queen of England.</head>

<p>
I am asked: <hi rend='italic'>Must you not admit that Mary,
Queen of England, persecuted the Protestants of
the British realm</hi>? I ask this question in reply:
<hi rend='italic'>How is it that Catholics are persistently reproached
<pb n="262"/><anchor id="Pg262"/>
for the persecutions under Mary's reign,
while scarcely a voice is raised in condemnation
of the legalized fines, confiscations and deaths inflicted
on the Catholics of Great Britain and Ireland
for three hundred years&mdash;from the establishment
of the church of England, in 1534, to the
time of the Catholic emancipation?</hi> Elizabeth's
hands were steeped in the blood of Catholics,
Puritans and Anabaptists. Why are these cruelties
suppressed or glossed over, while those of
Mary form the burden of every nursery tale? Is
it because persecution becomes justice when Catholics
happen to be the victims, or is it because they
are expected, from long usage, to be insensible to
torture?
</p>

<p>
If we weigh in the scales of impartial justice
the reigns of both sisters, we shall be compelled
to bring a far more severe verdict against Elizabeth.
</p>

<p>
First&mdash;Mary reigned only five years and four
months. Elizabeth's reign lasted forty-four years
and four months. The younger sister, therefore,
swayed the sceptre of authority nearly nine times
longer than the elder; and the number of Catholics
who suffered for their faith during the long
administration of Elizabeth may be safely said to
exceed in the same proportion the victims of
Mary's reign. Hallam asserts that <q>the rack seldom
stood idle in the tower for all the latter part
of Elizabeth's reign;</q><note place='foot'>Constitutional
History; Elizabeth, Chap. III.</note> and its very first month
was stained by an intolerant statute.<note place='foot'>See
Lingard, Vol. VII., pp. 244-5.</note>
</p>

<p>
Second&mdash;The most unpardonable act of Mary's
life, in the judgment of her critics, was the execution
of Lady Jane Grey. But Lady Jane was
guilty of high treason, having usurped the throne
of England, which she occupied for nine days.
<pb n="263"/><anchor id="Pg263"/>
Elizabeth put to death her cousin Mary, Queen
of Scots, after a long imprisonment, on the unsustained
charge of aspiring to the English throne.
</p>

<p>
Third&mdash;Mary's zeal was exercised in behalf of
the religion of her forefathers, and of the faith
established in England for nearly a thousand
years.
</p>

<p>
Elizabeth's zeal was employed in extending the
new creed introduced by her father in a moment
of passion, and modified by herself. Surely, the
coercive enforcement of a new creed is more
odious than the rigorous maintenance of the time-honored
faith of a nation.
</p>

<p>
Mary, therefore, insisted on perpetuating the established
order of things; Elizabeth on subverting
it.
</p>

<p>
Fourth&mdash;The elder sister was propagating what
she believed to be the unchangeable and infallible
doctrines of Jesus Christ; the younger sister was
propagating her own and her father's novel and
more or less uncertain opinions.
</p>

<p>
Fifth&mdash;While Mary had no private or personal
motives in oppressing Protestants, Elizabeth's
hostility to the Catholic Church was intensified,
if not instigated, by her hatred of the Pope, who
had declared her illegitimate. Her legitimacy before
the world depended on the success of the new
religion, which had legalized her father's divorce
from Catherine.
</p>

<p>
Sixth&mdash;Hence as Macaulay says, Mary was sincere
in her religion; Elizabeth was not. <q>Having
no scruple about conforming to the Romish Church
when conformity was necessary to her own safety,
retaining to the last moment of her life a fondness
for much of the doctrine and much of the
ceremonial of that Church, she yet subjected that
Church to a persecution even more odious than
<pb n="264"/><anchor id="Pg264"/>
the persecution with which her sister had harassed
the Protestants. Mary ... did nothing for her
religion which she was not prepared to suffer for
it. She had held it firmly under persecution. She
fully believed it to be essential to salvation.
Elizabeth, in opinion, was little more than half a
Protestant. She had professed, when it suited
her, to be wholly a Catholic.... What can be
said in defence of a ruler who is at once indifferent
and intolerant?</q><note place='foot'>Macaulay's Essays,
<q>Review of Nares' Memoirs of Lord
Burleigh.</q></note>
</p>

<p>
An intelligent gentleman in North Carolina once
said to me tauntingly, What do you think of
bloody Mary? Did you ever hear, I replied, of
her sister's cruelties to Catholics? He answered
that he never read of that <emph>mild</emph> woman persecuting
for conscience' sake. I was amazed at his
words, until he acknowledged that his historical
library was comprised in one work&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>D' Aubigné's
History of the Reformation</hi>. That <emph>veracious</emph> author
has prudently suppressed, or delicately
touched, Elizabeth's peccadilloes as not coming
within the scope of his plan. How many are
found, like our North Carolina gentleman, who
are familiar from their childhood with the name
of <emph>Smithfield</emph>, but who never once heard of
<emph>Tyburn</emph>!
</p>

</div>

</div>

<pb n="265"/><anchor id="Pg265"/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc' level1='Chapter XIX. Grace&mdash;The Sacraments&mdash;Original
Sin&mdash;Baptism&mdash;Its Necessity&mdash;Its Effects&mdash;Manner Of Baptizing.'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='Chapter XIX.'/>
<head type='sub'>Chapter XIX.</head>
<head>Grace&mdash;The Sacraments&mdash;Original Sin&mdash;Baptism&mdash;Its
Necessity&mdash;Its Effects&mdash;Manner Of Baptizing.</head>

<p>
The grace of God is that supernatural assistance
which He imparts to us, through the
merits of Jesus Christ, for our salvation. It
is called <hi rend='italic'>supernatural</hi>, because no one by his own
natural ability can acquire it.
</p>

<p>
Without Divine grace we can neither conceive
nor accomplish anything for the sanctification of
our souls. <q>Not that we are sufficient,</q> says
the Apostle, <q>to think anything of ourselves, as
of ourselves; but our sufficiency is from God.</q><note place='foot'>II.
Cor. iii. 5.</note> <q>For it is God who worketh in you, both to will
and to accomplish</q><note place='foot'>Phil. ii.
13.</note> anything conducive to your
salvation. <q>Without Me,</q> says our Lord, <q>you
can do nothing.</q><note place='foot'>John xv.
5.</note> But in order that Divine grace
may effectually aid us we must co-operate with
it, or at least we must not resist it.
</p>

<p>
The grace of God is obtained chiefly by prayer
and the Sacraments.
</p>

<p>
A Sacrament is a visible sign instituted by
Christ by which grace is conveyed to our souls.
Three things are necessary to constitute a Sacrament,
viz.&mdash;a visible sign, invisible grace and the
institution by our Lord Jesus Christ.
</p>

<p>
Thus, in the Sacrament of Baptism, there is
<pb n="266"/><anchor id="Pg266"/>
the outward sign, which consists in the pouring
of water and in the formula of words which are
then pronounced; the interior grace or sanctification
which is imparted to the soul: <q>Be baptized, ...
and you shall receive the gift of the
Holy Ghost;</q><note place='foot'>Acts ii.
38.</note> and the ordinance of Jesus Christ,
who said: <q>Teach all nations, baptizing them in
the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of
the Holy Ghost.</q><note place='foot'>Matt. xxviii. 19.</note>
</p>

<p>
Our Savior instituted seven Sacraments, namely,
Baptism, Confirmation, Eucharist, Penance,
Extreme Unction, Orders and Matrimony, which
I shall explain separately.
</p>

<p>
According to the teachings of Holy Writ, man
was created in a state of innocence and holiness,
and after having spent on this earth his allotted
terms of years he was destined, without tasting
death, to be translated to the perpetual society
of God in heaven.<note place='foot'>See Wisdom ii.
23.</note> But in consequence of his disobedience
he fell from his high estate of righteousness;
his soul was defiled by sin; he became
subject to death and to various ills of body and
soul and forfeited his heavenly inheritance.
</p>

<p>
Adam's transgression was not confined to himself,
but was transmitted, with its long train of
dire consequences, to all his posterity. It is called
<emph>original</emph> sin because it is derived from our original
progenitor. <q>Wherefore,</q> says St. Paul, <q>as by
one man sin entered into this world, and by sin
death, and so death passed unto all men, in whom
all have sinned.</q><note place='foot'>Rom. v.
12.</note> And elsewhere he tells us
that <q>we were by nature children of wrath.</q><note place='foot'>Eph. ii. 3.</note>
</p>

<p>
<q>Who,</q> says Job, <q>can make him clean that is
conceived of unclean seed,</q> or, as the Septuagint
version expresses it: <q>There is no one free from
<pb n="267"/><anchor id="Pg267"/>
stain, not even though his life be of one day.</q><note place='foot'>Job xiv. 4.</note>
As an infant one day old cannot commit an actual
sin, the <emph>stain</emph> must come from the original offense
of Adam. <q>Behold,</q> says David, <q>I was conceived
in iniquities, and in sins did my mother
conceive me.</q><note place='foot'>Ps. l.
7.</note> The Scripture also tells us that
Jeremiah and John the Baptist were sanctified
before their birth, or purified from sin, and, of
course, at that period of their existence they
were incapable of actual sin. They were cleansed,
therefore, from the original taint.
</p>

<p>
These passages clearly show that we have all
inherited the transgression of our first parents,
and that we are born enemies of God. And it is
equally plain that these texts apply to every member
of the human family&mdash;to the infant of a day
old as well as to the adult.
</p>

<p>
Indeed, even without the light of Holy Scripture,
we have only to look into ourselves to be
convinced that our nature has undergone a rude
shock. How else can we account for the miseries
and infirmities of our bodies, the blindness of our
understanding, the perversity of our will&mdash;inclined
always to evil rather than to good&mdash;the violence
of our passions, which are constantly waging war
in our hearts? How well does the Catholic doctrine
explain this abnormal state. Hence, Paschal
truly says that man is a greater mystery
to himself without original sin than is the mystery
itself.
</p>

<p>
The Church, however, declares that the Blessed
Virgin Mary was exempted from the stain of
original sin by the merits of our Savior Jesus
Christ; and that, consequently, she was never
for an instant subject to the dominion of Satan.
</p>

<pb n="268"/><anchor id="Pg268"/>

<p>
This is what is meant by the doctrine of the Immaculate
Conception.
</p>

<p>
But God, in passing sentence of condemnation
on Adam, consoled him by the promise of a Redeemer
to come. <q>I will put enmities,</q> saith the
Lord, <q>between thee and the woman, and thy
seed and her seed; she shall crush thy head.</q><note place='foot'>Gen. iii. 15.</note>
Jesus, the seed of Mary, is the chosen one who
was destined to crush the head of the infernal
serpent. And <q>when the fulness of time was
come God sent His Son, made of a woman, ...
that He might redeem them that were under the
law, that we might receive the adoption of
sons.</q><note place='foot'>Gal. iv. 4, 5.</note>
</p>

<p>
Jesus Christ, our Redeemer, came to wash away
the defilement from our souls and to restore us
to that Divine friendship which we had lost by
the sin of Adam. He is the second Adam, who
came to repair the iniquity of the first. It was
our Savior's privilege to prescribe the conditions
on which our reconciliation with God was to be
effected.
</p>

<p>
Now He tells us in His Gospel that Baptism is
the essential means established for washing away
the stain of original sin and the door by which
we find admittance into His Church, which may
be called the second Eden. We must all submit
to a new birth, or regeneration, before we can
enter the kingdom of heaven. Water is the appropriate
instrument of this new birth, as it indicates
the interior cleansing of the soul; and the
Holy Ghost, the Giver of spiritual life, is its Author.
</p>

<p>
The Church teaches that Baptism is necessary
for all, for infants as well as adults, and her doctrine
rests on the following grounds:
</p>

<p>
Our Lord says to Nicodemus: <q>Amen, amen,
<pb n="269"/><anchor id="Pg269"/>
I say to thee, unless a man be born again of
water and the Holy Ghost he cannot enter into the
kingdom of God.</q><note place='foot'>John iii.
5.</note> These words embrace the
whole human family, without regard to age or
sex, as is evident from the original Greek text,
for τις, which is rendered <hi rend='italic'>man</hi> in our English
translation, means any one&mdash;mankind in its broadest
acceptation.
</p>

<p>
The Acts of the Apostles and the Epistles of
St. Paul, although containing only a fragmentary
account of the ministry of the Apostles, plainly
insinuate that the Apostles baptized children as
well as grown persons. We are told, for instance,
that Lydia <q>was baptized, and her
household,</q><note place='foot'>Acts xvi. 15.</note>
by St. Paul; and that the jailer <q>was baptized, and
all his family.</q><note place='foot'>Ibid. xvi.
33.</note> The same Apostle baptized also
<q>the household of Stephanas.</q><note place='foot'>I.
Cor. i. 16.</note> Although it is
not expressly stated that there were children
among these baptized families, the presumption
is strongly in favor of the supposition that there
were. But if any doubt exists regarding the
Apostolic practice of baptizing infants it is easily
removed by referring to the writings of the primitive
Fathers of the Church, who, as they were
the immediate successors of the Apostles, ought
to be the best interpreters of their doctrines and
practice.
</p>

<p>
St. Irenæus, a disciple of Polycarp, who was a
disciple of St. John the Evangelist, says: <q>Christ
came to save all through Himself; all, I say, <emph>who
are born anew</emph> (or baptized) through Him&mdash;infants
and little ones, boys and youths, and aged
persons.</q><note place='foot'>Lib. II. adr. Hær.</note>
</p>

<p>
Origen, who lived a few years later, writes:
<pb n="270"/><anchor id="Pg270"/>
<q>The Church received the tradition from the
Apostles, to give baptism even to infants.</q><note place='foot'>In Ep. ad Rom.</note>
</p>

<p>
The early church of Africa bears triumphant
testimony in vindication of infant baptism. St.
Cyprian and sixty-six suffragan Prelates held a
council in the metropolitan city of Carthage, in the
year 253. While the Council is in session a Prelate
named Fidus writes to the Fathers, asking
them whether infants ought to be baptized before
the eighth day succeeding their birth, or on the
eighth day, in accordance with the practice of
circumcision. The Bishops unanimously subscribe
to the following reply: <q>As to what regards
the baptism of infants, ... we all judged
that the mercy and grace of God should be denied
to no human being from the moment of his
birth. If even to the greatest delinquents the remission
of sins is granted, how much less should
the infant be repelled, who, being recently born
according to Adam, has contracted at his first
birth the contagion of the ancient death.</q><note place='foot'>Epis.
ad Fidum.</note> The
African Council asserts here two prominent facts&mdash;the
universal contagion of the human race
through Adam's fall, and the universal necessity
of Baptism without distinction of age.
</p>

<p>
Upon this decision, I will make two observations:
First&mdash;Fidus did not inquire about the
necessity of infant baptism, which he already admitted,
but about the propriety of conferring it
on the eighth day, in imitation of the Jewish law
of circumcision. Second&mdash;The Bishops assembled
in that Council were as numerous as the whole
Episcopate of the United States, which contains
about five thousand Priests and upwards of six
millions of Catholics. We may therefore reasonably
<pb n="271"/><anchor id="Pg271"/>
conclude that the judgment of the African
Council represented the faith of several thousand
Priests and several millions of Catholics.
</p>

<p>
St. Augustine, commenting on this decision,
justly observes that St. Cyprian and his colleagues
made no new decree, but maintained most
firmly the faith of the Church. And this is the
unanimous sentiment of tradition from the days
of the Apostles to our own times.
</p>

<p>
Is it not ludicrous as well as impious to see a
few German fanatics, in the sixteenth century,
raising their feeble voice against the thunder
tones of all Christendom, by decrying a practice
which was universally held as sacred and essential?
In judging between the teachings of Apostolical
antiquity on the one hand and of the Anabaptists
on the other, it is not hard to determine
on which side lies the truth; for, what becomes
of the Christian Church, if it has erred on so vital
a point as that of Baptism during the entire
period of its existence?
</p>

<p>
Original sin, as St. Paul has told us, is universal.
Every child is, therefore, defiled at its
birth with the taint of Adam's disobedience. Now,
the Scripture says that nothing defiled can enter
the kingdom of heaven.<note place='foot'>Apoc.
xxi. 27.</note> Hence Baptism, which
washes away original sin, is as essential for the
infant as for the full grown man, in order to attain
the kingdom of heaven.
</p>

<p>
I said that regeneration is necessary for all.
But it is important to observe that if a man is
heartily sorry for his sins, if he loves God with
his whole heart, if he desires to comply with all
the Divine ordinances, including Baptism, but has
no opportunity of receiving it, or is not sufficiently
instructed as to its necessity, God, in this case,
accepts the will for the deed. Should this man die
in these dispositions, he is saved by the <emph>baptism of
<pb n="272"/><anchor id="Pg272"/>
desire</emph>, as happened to the Emperor Valentinian
who died a Catechuman: <q>I lost him whom I was
about to regenerate,</q> says St. Ambrose, <q>but he
did not lose that grace he sought for.</q> Or, if an unbaptized
person lays down his life for Christ, his
death is accepted as more than an equivalent for
baptism; for he dies not only sanctified, but he will
wear a martyr's crown. <emph>He is baptized in his own
blood.</emph>
</p>

<p>
But is not that a cruel and heartless doctrine
which excludes from heaven so many harmless
babes that have never committed any actual fault?
To this I reply: Has not God declared that Baptism
is necessary for all? And is not God the
supreme Wisdom and Justice and Mercy? I am
sure, then, that there can be nothing cruel or unjust
in God's decrees. The province of reason
consists in ascertaining that God has spoken.
When we know that He has spoken, then our investigation
ceases, and faith and obedience begin.
Instead of impiously criticising the Divine
decree, we should exclaim with the Apostle: <q>O!
the depth of the riches of the wisdom and knowledge
of God! how incomprehensible are His judgments,
and how unsearchable His ways! For, who
hath known the mind of the Lord? or who hath
been His counsellor?</q><note place='foot'>Rom. xi. 33, 34.</note>
</p>

<p>
Let us remember that heaven is a place to which
none of us has any inherent right or natural claim,
but that it is promised to us by the pure favor
of God. He can reject and adopt whom He
pleases, and can, without injustice, prescribe His
own conditions for accepting His proffered boon.
If your child is deprived of heaven by being deprived
of Baptism, God does it no wrong because
He infringes no right to which your child had
any inalienable title. If your child obtains the
grace of Baptism be thankful for the gift.
</p>

<pb n="273"/><anchor id="Pg273"/>

<p>
It is proper here to state briefly what the
Church actually teaches regarding the future state
of unbaptized infants. Though the Church, in
obedience to God's Word, declares that unbaptized
infants are excluded from the kingdom of
heaven, it should not hence be concluded that they
are consigned to the place of the reprobate. None
are condemned to the torments of the damned
but such as merit Divine vengeance by their personal
sins.
</p>

<p>
All that the Church holds on this point is that
unregenerate children are deprived of the beatific
vision, or the possession of God, which constitutes
the essential happiness of the blessed.
</p>

<p>
Now, between the supreme bliss of heaven and
the torments of the reprobate, there is a very
wide margin.
</p>

<p>
All admit that the condition of unbaptized infants
is better than non-existence. There are
some Catholic writers of distinction who even assert
that unbaptized infants enjoy a certain degree
of natural beatitude&mdash;that is, a happiness
which is based on the natural knowledge and love
of God.
</p>

<p>
From what has been said you may well judge
how reprehensible is the conduct of Catholic parents
who neglect to have their children baptized
at the earliest possible moment, thereby risking
their own souls, as well as the souls of their innocent
offspring. How different was the practice
of the early Christians, who, as St. Augustine
testifies, hastened with their new-born babes to
the baptismal font that they might not be deprived
of the grace of regeneration.
</p>

<p>
If an infant is sick, no expense is spared that
its life may be preserved. The physician is called
in, medicine is given to it, and the mother will
<pb n="274"/><anchor id="Pg274"/>
spend sleepless nights watching every movement
of the infant; she will sacrifice her repose, her
health; nay, she will expose even her own life
that the life of her offspring may be saved. And
yet the supernatural happiness of the child is
too often imperiled without remorse by the criminal
postponement of Baptism.
</p>

<p>
But if they are to be censured who are slow
in having their children baptized, what are we
to think of that large body of professing Christians
who, on principle, deny Baptism to little
ones till they come to the age of discretion? What
are we to think of those who set their private
opinions above Scripture, the early Fathers of
the Church and the universal practice of Christendom?
</p>

<p>
We may smile indeed at a theological opinion,
no matter how novel or erroneous it may be, so
long as it does not involve any dangerous consequences.
But when it is given in a case of life
and death, how terrible is the responsibility of
those who propagate doctrines so erroneous!
</p>

<p>
The opposite practice of the Catholic and the
Baptist churches, in their treatment of the newborn
infant, may be well compared to the conduct
of the true and the false mother who both claimed
the child at the tribunal of Solomon. The king
exclaimed: <q>Divide the living child in two, and
give half to the one and half to the other.</q> The
pretended mother consented, saying: Let it be
neither mine nor thine, but divide it. <q>But the
woman whose child was alive, said to the king
(for her bowels were moved upon her child): I
beseech thee, my lord, give her the child alive,
and do not kill it.</q> While the Baptist church is
willing that the child should die a spiritual death,
the true mother, the Catholic Church, cries out:
<pb n="275"/><anchor id="Pg275"/>
Keep the child, provided its spiritual life is saved,
even at your hands. Let it be clothed with the
robe of innocence even by a stranger. Let it be
nursed at the breasts even of a step-mother. Better
it should live without me than perish before
my face. I will still be its mother, though it
know me not.
</p>

<p>
Ah! my Baptist friend, you think that Baptism
is not necessary for your child's salvation. The
old Church teaches the contrary. You admit that
you may be wrong, and it is a question of life and
death. Take the safe side. Give your child the
benefit of the doubt. Let it be baptized.
</p>

<p>
Baptism washes away <emph>original sin, and also
actual sins</emph> from the adult who may have contracted
them. The cleansing efficacy of Baptism
was clearly foreshadowed by the prophet Ezechiel
in these words: <q>I will pour upon you clean
water, and you shall be cleansed from all your
filthiness. And I will give you a new heart and
will put a new spirit within you.</q><note place='foot'>Ezech. xxxvi. 25, 26.</note>
</p>

<p>
When the Jews asked St. Peter what they
should do to be saved the Apostle replied: <q>Repent,
and let everyone of you be baptized in the
name of Jesus Christ for the remission of your
sins.</q><note place='foot'>Acts ii. 38.</note>
</p>

<p>
And Ananias said to Saul, after his conversion:
<q>Rise up and be baptized, and wash away
thy sins.</q><note place='foot'>Ibid. xxii. 16.</note>
</p>

<p>
<q>We were by nature,</q> says St. Paul, <q>children
of wrath,</q> but by our regeneration, or new
birth in Baptism, we become <emph>Christians and children
of God</emph>. <q>For, ye are all the children of
God by faith in Christ Jesus. For as many of
you as have been baptized in Christ have put on
Christ.</q><note place='foot'>Gal. iii. 26,
27.</note> We are adopted into the same family
<pb n="276"/><anchor id="Pg276"/>
with Jesus Christ. What He is by nature we are
by grace&mdash;children of God, and consequently
brethren of Christ. Nay, our union with Jesus is
still more close. We become true members of His
mystical body, which is His Church, and His Divine
image is stamped upon our soul.
</p>

<p>
Baptism also clothes us with the <emph>garment of
sanctity</emph>, so that our soul becomes a fit dwelling-place
for the Holy Ghost. The Apostle, after giving
a fearful catalogue of the vices of the Pagans,
says to the Corinthians: <q>And such some of you
were; but ye are washed, but ye are sanctified,
but ye are justified in the name of our Lord Jesus
Christ, and in the Spirit of God.</q><note place='foot'>I. Cor. vi. 11.</note>
</p>

<p>
Baptism, in fine, makes us <emph>heirs of heaven</emph> and
co-heirs with Jesus Christ. <q>We ourselves also,</q>
says St. Paul, <q>were sometimes unwise, incredulous,
erring, slaves to divers desires and pleasures,
living in malice and envy, hateful, and
hating one another. But when the goodness and
kindness of God our Savior appeared, ... He
saved us by the laver of regeneration and renovation
of the Holy Ghost, whom He hath poured
forth abundantly upon us, through Jesus Christ
our Savior, that being justified by His grace, we
may be heirs, according to the hope of life everlasting.</q><note place='foot'>Tit.
iii. 3-7.</note>
</p>

<p>
Here we plainly see that the forgiveness of sin,
the adoption into the family of God, the sanctification
of the soul and the pledge of eternal life
are ascribed to the due reception of Baptism&mdash;not,
indeed, that water or the words of the minister
have any intrinsic virtue to heal the soul, but
because Jesus Christ, whose word is creative
power, is pleased to attach to this rite its wonderful
efficacy of healing the soul, as He imparted
<pb n="277"/><anchor id="Pg277"/>
to the pool of Bethsaida the power of healing the
body.<note place='foot'>John v.</note>
</p>

<p>
From what has been said, I ask you candidly
what are you to think of the decision rendered in
1872 by the Bishops of the Protestant Episcopal
Church, who, in their convention in Baltimore, declared
that by the word <hi rend='italic'>regeneration</hi> we are not to
understand <hi rend='italic'>a moral change</hi>. If no moral change
is effected by Baptism, then there is no change at
all; for certainly Baptism produces no physical
change in the soul.
</p>

<p>
Is it no change to pass from sin to virtue, from
a <q>child of wrath</q> to be a <q>child of God;</q> from
corruption to sanctification; from the condition of
heirs of death to the inheritance of heaven? If all
this implies no moral change, then these words
have lost their meaning.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Modes of baptizing.</hi> The Baptists err in asserting
that Baptism by immersion is the only valid
mode. Baptism may be validly administered in
either of three ways, viz: by <emph>immersion</emph>, or by
plunging the candidate into the water; by <emph>infusion</emph>,
or by pouring the water; and by <emph>aspersion</emph>, or
sprinkling.
</p>

<p>
As our Lord nowhere prescribes any special
form of administering the Sacrament, the Church
exercises her discretion in adopting the most convenient
mode, according to the circumstances of
time and place.
</p>

<p>
For several centuries after the establishment of
Christianity Baptism was <emph>usually</emph> conferred by
immersion; but since the twelfth century the practice
of baptising by infusion has prevailed in the
Catholic Church, as this manner is attended with
less inconvenience than Baptism by immersion.
</p>

<p>
To prove that Baptism by infusion or by sprinkling
<pb n="278"/><anchor id="Pg278"/>
is as legitimate as by immersion, it is only
necessary to observe that, though immersion was
the more common practice in the Primitive
Church, the Sacrament was frequently administered
even then by infusion and aspersion.
</p>

<p>
After St. Peter's first discourse three thousand
persons were baptized.<note place='foot'>Acts
ii. 41.</note> It is not likely that so
many could have been immersed in one day,
especially when we consider the time occupied in
instructing the candidates.
</p>

<p>
On reading the account of the Baptism of St.
Paul and the jailer the context leaves a strong impression
on the mind that both received the Sacrament
by aspersion or by infusion.
</p>

<p>
Early ecclesiastical history records a great
many instances in which Baptism was administered
to <emph>sick persons</emph> in their beds, to <emph>prisoners</emph> in
their cells, and to persons on <emph>shipboard</emph>. The
Fathers of the Church never called in question the
validity or the legitimacy of such Baptisms. Now,
it is almost impossible to believe that candidates
in such situations could receive the rite by immersion.
</p>

<p>
We have seen, moreover, that Baptism has always
been declared necessary for salvation. It is
reasonable, hence, to believe that our Lord would
have afforded the greatest facility for the reception
of so essential a Sacrament.
</p>

<p>
But if Baptism by immersion only is valid, how
many sick and delicate persons, how many prisoners
and seafaring people, how many thousands
living in the frigid zone, or even in the temperate
zone, in the depth of an inclement winter, though
craving the grace of regeneration, would be deprived
of God's seal, or would receive it at the risk
of their lives! Surely God does not ordinarily
<pb n="279"/><anchor id="Pg279"/>
impose His ordinances upon us under such a
penalty.
</p>

<p>
Moreover, if immersion is the only valid form
of Baptism, what has become of the millions of
souls who, in every age and country, have been
regenerated by the infusion or the aspersion of
water in the Christian Church?
</p>

</div>

<pb n="280"/><anchor id="Pg280"/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc' level1='Chapter XX. The Sacrament Of Confirmation.'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='Chapter XX.'/>
<head type='sub'>Chapter XX.</head>
<head>The Sacrament Of Confirmation.</head>

<p>
Confirmation is a Sacrament in which,
through the imposition of the Bishop's
hands, unction and prayer, baptized persons
receive the Holy Ghost, that they may steadfastly
profess their faith and lead upright lives.
</p>

<p>
This Sacrament is called <hi rend='italic'>Confirmation</hi>, because
it <emph>confirms</emph> or strengthens the soul by Divine grace.
Sometimes it is named <hi rend='italic'>the laying on of hands</hi>, because
the Bishop imposes his hands on those
whom he confirms. It is also known by the name
of <hi rend='italic'>Chrism</hi>, because the forehead of the person confirmed
is anointed with chrism in the form of a
cross.
</p>

<p>
Frequent mention is made of this Sacrament in
the Holy Scripture. In the Acts it is written that
<q>When the Apostles who were in Jerusalem had
heard that Samaria had received the Word of God
they sent unto them Peter and John, who, when
they were come, prayed for them that they might
receive the Holy Ghost; for He was not yet come
upon any of them, but they were only baptized
in the name of the Lord Jesus. Then they laid
their hands on them, and they received the Holy
Ghost.</q><note place='foot'>Acts viii. 14-17.</note>
</p>

<p>
It is also related that the disciples at Ephesus
<q>were baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus,
<pb n="281"/><anchor id="Pg281"/>
and when Paul had imposed his hands upon them
the Holy Ghost came upon them and they spoke
tongues and prophesied.</q><note place='foot'>Acts xix. 5, 6.</note>
</p>

<p>
In his Epistle to the Hebrews St. Paul enumerates
Confirmation, or the laying on of hands,
together with Baptism and Penance, among the
fundamental truths of Christianity.<note place='foot'>Heb. vi. 1, 2.</note>
</p>

<p>
To the Corinthians he writes: <q>He that confirmeth
us with you in Christ, and that hath
anointed us, is God; who also hath sealed us and
given the pledge of the Spirit in our hearts.</q><note place='foot'>II.
Cor. i. 21.</note> God <emph>confirmeth</emph> us in faith; He hath
<emph>anointed</emph> us by spiritual unction, typified by the sacred chrism
which is marked on our foreheads. He hath <emph>sealed</emph>
us by the indelible character stamped on our souls,
which is indicated by the sign of the cross impressed
on us. He hath given the <emph>pledge</emph> of the
Holy Ghost in our hearts, by the testimony of a
good conscience, as an earnest of future glory.
The Bishop performs the external unction, but
God, <q>who worketh all in all,</q> sanctifies the soul
by His secret operation.
</p>

<p>
It cannot be asserted that the laying on of hands
and the graces which followed from it, as recorded
in the Acts, were not intended to be continued
after the Apostles' times, for there is no warrant
for such an assumption. This function of imposing
hands formed as regular and imperative a part
of the Apostolic ministry as the duties which they
exercised in preaching, baptizing, ordaining, etc.
Hence the successors of the Apostles in the nineteenth
century have precisely the same authority
and obligation to confirm as they have to preach,
to baptize or to ordain.
</p>

<p>
Those who were confirmed by the Apostles
<pb n="282"/><anchor id="Pg282"/>
usually gave evidence of the grace which they received
by prophecy, the gift of tongues and the
manifestation of other miraculous powers. It may
be asked: Why do not these gifts accompany now
the imposition of hands? I answer: Because they
are no longer needed. The grace which the Apostolic
disciples received was for their personal
sanctification. The gift of tongues which they
exercised was intended by Almighty God to edify
and enlighten the spectators, and to give Divine
sanction to the Apostolic ministry. But now that
the Church is firmly established, and the Divine
authority of her ministry is clearly recognized,
these miracles are no longer necessary. St. Gregory
illustrates this point by a happy comparison:
As the sapling, he says, when it is first planted
is regularly watered by the gardener, who softens
the earth around it, that the sun and the moisture
may nourish its roots until it takes deep root and
it no longer requires any special care, so the
Church in her infancy had to be nourished by the
miraculous power of God. But after it had taken
root in the hearts of the people and spread its
branches over the earth it was left to the ordinary
agencies of Providence.
</p>

<p>
St. Augustine writes also on the same subject:
<q>In the first days (of the Church) the Holy Ghost
came down on believers, and they spoke in tongues
which they had not learned.... These were
miracles suited to the times.... Is it now expected
that they upon whom hands are laid should
speak with tongues? Or, when we imposed hands
on these children, did each of you wait to see
whether they would speak with tongues?... If,
then, there be not now a testimony to the presence
of the Holy Spirit by means of these miracles,
whence is it proved that he has received the Holy
<pb n="283"/><anchor id="Pg283"/>
Spirit? Let him ask his own heart; if he loves his
brother, the Spirit of God abides in him.</q><note place='foot'>Tract
VI. in Ep. Joan.</note>
</p>

<p>
Following in the footsteps of the Apostles we
find the Fathers of the Church, from the earliest
age, recognizing Confirmation as a Divine and
sacramental institution and proclaiming its salutary
effects.
</p>

<p>
<q>The flesh,</q> says Tertullian, <q>is <emph>anointed</emph>, that
the soul may be consecrated; the flesh is marked,
that the soul may be fortified; the flesh is overshadowed
<emph>by the imposition of hands</emph>, that the soul
may be enlightened with the Spirit.</q><note place='foot'>De Resur. car.</note>
</p>

<p>
St. Cyprian, speaking of the Christians baptized
in Samaria, says: <q>Because they had received the
legitimate baptism, ... what was wanting, that
was done by Peter and John, that prayer being
made for them and hands imposed, the Holy Ghost
should be invoked and poured forth upon them.
<emph>Which now also is done amongst us</emph>, so that they
who are baptized in the Church are presented to
the Bishops of the Church, and by our prayer and
imposition of hands they receive the Holy Ghost
and are perfected with the seal of the Lord.</q><note place='foot'>Epist. lxxiii.</note>
</p>

<p>
St. Cyril of Jerusalem compares the sacred
Chrism in Confirmation to the Eucharist: <q>You
were anointed with oil, being made sharers and
partners of Christ. And see well that you regard
it not as mere ointment; for, as the bread of the
Eucharist, after the invocation of the Holy Ghost,
is no longer mere bread but the body of Christ, so
likewise this holy ointment is no longer common
ointment after the invocation, but the gift of
Christ and of the Holy Ghost, being rendered
efficient by His Divinity. You were anointed on
the forehead, that you might be delivered from the
<pb n="284"/><anchor id="Pg284"/>
shame which the first transgressor always experienced,
and that you might contemplate the glory
of God with an unveiled countenance.... As
Christ, after His baptism and the descent of the
Holy Ghost upon Him, going forth overcame the
adversary, so you likewise, after holy baptism and
the mysterious unction, clothed with the panoply
of the Holy Ghost, stand against the adverse
power and subdue it, saying: <q>I can do all things
in Christ, who strengtheneth me.</q></q><note place='foot'>Cat.
xxi. Mys. iii. De S. Chrism.</note>
</p>

<p>
St. Ambrose, commenting on these words of the
Apostle, <q>God ... hath given us the pledge of
the Spirit,</q> (II. Cor. i. 22) expressly applies the
text to the seal of Confirmation. <q>Remember,</q>
he says, <q>that you have received the spiritual seal,
the spirit of wisdom and understanding, the spirit
of counsel and fortitude, the spirit of knowledge
and piety, the spirit of holy fear. God the Father
hath sealed you; Christ the Lord hath <emph>confirmed</emph>
you, and hath given the pledge of the Spirit in
your hearts, <emph>as you have learned from the lesson
read from the Apostle</emph>.</q><note place='foot'>De Myst. cvii. n. 42.</note>
</p>

<p>
St. Ambrose here speaks of the sevenfold gifts
of the Holy Ghost which are received in Confirmation,
and every Bishop in our day invokes these
same gifts on those whom he is about to confirm.
</p>

<p>
<q>Do you know,</q> writes St. Jerome against the
sect of Luciferians of his time, <q>that it is the practice
of the churches that the imposition of hands
should be performed over baptized persons and
the Holy Ghost thus invoked? Do you ask where
it is written? In the Acts of the Apostles; but
were there no Scriptural authority at hand the
consent of the whole world in this regard would
have the force of law.</q><note place='foot'>Dial. adv. Lucifer.</note>
</p>

<pb n="285"/><anchor id="Pg285"/>

<p>
<q>You willingly understand,</q> says St. Augustine,
<q>by this ointment the Sacrament of Chrism,
which, indeed, in the class of visible seals is as
sacred as Baptism itself.</q><note place='foot'>L. II., contra lit. Petil.</note>
</p>

<p>
The Oriental schismatic churches recognize Confirmation
as a Sacrament, and administer the rite
as we do, by the imposition of hands and the application
of chrism. Now, some of these churches
have been separated from the Catholic Church
since the fourth and fifth centuries. This fact is
an eloquent vindication of the Apostolic antiquity
of Confirmation, and is an ample refutation of
those who would ascribe to it a more recent origin.
</p>

<p>
Protestantism, which made such havoc of the
other Sacraments, did not fail to abolish Confirmation
in its sweeping revolution.
</p>

<p>
The Episcopal church retains, indeed, the name
of Confirmation in its ritual, and even borrows a
portion of our prayers and ceremonial. But, in
opposition to the uniform teaching of the Catholic,
as well as of all the Oriental churches, both orthodox
and schismatic, it declares Confirmation to
be a mere rite and not a Sacrament.
</p>

<p>
In violation of the practice of all antiquity it
mutilates the rite by omitting the sacred unction.
It retains the shadow without the substance.
</p>

<p>
It raises, indeed, its hands over the candidates;
but they are not the anointed hands of Peter or
John, or Cyprian or Augustine, to whom it is said:
<q>Whatsoever thou shalt bless, let it be blessed;
whatsoever thou shalt sanctify, let it be
sanctified.</q><note place='foot'>Roman Pontifical.</note>
Their hands were lifted up with authority
and clothed with supernatural power; but the
hands of the Episcopal Bishops are spiritually
<pb n="286"/><anchor id="Pg286"/>
paralyzed by the suicidal act of the Reformers,
and they expressly disclaim any sacramental efficacy
in the rite which they administer.
</p>

</div>

<pb n="287"/><anchor id="Pg287"/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc' level1='Chapter XXI. The Holy Eucharist.'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='Chapter XXI.'/>
<head type='sub'>Chapter XXI.</head>
<head>The Holy Eucharist.</head>

<p>
Among the various dogmas of the Catholic
Church there is none which rests on stronger
Scriptural authority than the doctrine of
the Real Presence of Jesus Christ in the Holy
Eucharist. So copious, indeed, and so clear are
the passages of the New Testament which treat
of this subject that I am at a loss to determine
which to select, and find it difficult to compress
them all within the compass of this short chapter.
</p>

<p>
The Evangelists do not always dwell upon the
same mysteries of religion. Their practice is
rather to supplement each other, so that one of
them will mention what the others have omitted
or have touched in a cursory way. But in regard
to the Blessed Eucharist the sacred writers exhibit
a marked deviation from this rule. We find
that the four Evangelists, together with St. Paul,
have written so explicitly and abundantly on this
subject that one of them alone would be amply
sufficient to prove the dogma without taking them
collectively.
</p>

<p>
These five inspired writers gave the weight of
their individual testimony to the doctrine of the
Eucharist because they foresaw&mdash;or rather the
Holy Ghost, speaking through them, foresaw&mdash;that
this great mystery, which exacts so strong
an exercise of our faith, and which bids us bow
<pb n="288"/><anchor id="Pg288"/>
down our <q>understanding unto the obedience of
Christ,</q><note place='foot'>II. Cor. x.
5.</note> would meet with opposition in the
course of time from those who would measure the
infallible Word of God by the erring standard of
their own judgment.
</p>

<p>
I shall select three classes of arguments from
the New Testament which satisfactorily demonstrate
the Real Presence of Christ in the Blessed
Sacrament. The first of these texts speaks of the
promise of the Eucharist, the second of its institution
and the third of its use among the faithful.
</p>

<p>
To begin with the words of the promise. While
Jesus was once preaching near the coast of the
Sea of Galilee He was followed, as usual, by an
immense multitude of persons, who were attracted
to Him by the miracles which He wrought and the
words of salvation which he spoke. Seeing that
the people had no food, He multiplied five loaves
and two fishes to such an extent as to supply the
wants of five thousand men, besides women and
children.
</p>

<p>
Our Lord considered the present a favorable
occasion for speaking of the Sacrament of His
body and blood, which was to be distributed, not
to a few thousands, but to millions of souls; not
in one place, but everywhere; not at one time, but
for all days, to the end of the world. <q>I am,</q> He
says to His hearers, <q>the bread of life. Your
fathers did eat manna in the desert and died....
I am the living bread which came down
from heaven. If any man eat of this bread he
shall live forever, and the bread which I will give
is My flesh for the life of the world. The Jews,
therefore, disputed among themselves, saying:
How can this man give us His flesh to eat? Then
Jesus said to them: Amen, amen, I say to you:
<pb n="289"/><anchor id="Pg289"/>
Unless ye eat the flesh of the Son of Man and
drink His blood, ye shall not have life in you. He
that eateth My flesh and drinketh My blood hath
everlasting life, and I will raise him up on the last
day. For My flesh is meat indeed, and My blood
drink indeed.</q><note place='foot'>John vi. 48-56.</note>
</p>

<p>
If these words had fallen on your ears for the
first time, and if you had been among the number
of our Savior's hearers on that occasion, would
you not have been irresistibly led, by the noble simplicity
of His words, to understand Him as speaking
truly of His body and blood? For His language
is not susceptible of any other interpretation.
</p>

<p>
When our Savior says to the Jews: <q>Your
fathers did eat manna and died, ... but he that
eateth this (Eucharistic) bread shall live forever,</q>
He evidently wishes to affirm the superiority
of the food which He would give, over the
manna by which the children of Israel were
nourished.
</p>

<p>
Now, if the Eucharist were merely commemorative
bread and wine, instead of being superior, it
would be really inferior to the manna; for the
manna was supernatural, heavenly, miraculous
food, while bread and wine are a natural, earthly
food.
</p>

<p>
But the best and the most reliable interpreters
of our Savior's words are certainly the multitude
and the disciples who are listening to Him. They
all understood the import of His language precisely
as it is explained by the Catholic Church. They
believed that our Lord spoke literally of His body
and blood. The Evangelist tells us that the Jews
<q>disputed among themselves, saying: How can
this man give us His flesh to eat?</q> Even His disciples,
though avoiding the disrespectful language
of the multitude, gave expression to their doubt in
<pb n="290"/><anchor id="Pg290"/>
this milder form: <q>This saying is hard, and who
can hear it?</q><note place='foot'>John vi.
61.</note> So much were they shocked at our
Savior's promise that <q>after this many of His disciples
went back and walked no more with Him.</q><note place='foot'>Ibid. vi. 67.</note>
They evidently implied, by their words and conduct,
that they understood Jesus to have spoken
literally of His flesh; for, had they interpreted His
words in a figurative sense, it would not have been
a hard saying, nor have led them to abandon their
Master.
</p>

<p>
But, perhaps, I shall be told that the disciples
and the Jews who heard our Savior may have misinterpreted
His meaning by taking His words in
the literal acceptation, while He may have spoken
in a figurative sense. This objection is easily disposed
of. It sometimes happened, indeed, that
our Savior was misunderstood by His hearers. On
such occasions He always took care to remove
from their mind the wrong impression they had
formed by stating His meaning in simpler language.
Thus, for instance, having told Nicodemus
that unless a man be born again he cannot
enter the kingdom of heaven, and having observed
that His meaning was not correctly apprehended
by this disciple our Savior added: <q>Unless a man
be born again of water and the Holy Ghost he cannot
enter the kingdom of heaven.</q><note place='foot'>John iii.</note> And again,
when he warned His disciples against the leaven
of the Pharisees, and finding that they had taken
an erroneous meaning from His word, He immediately
subjoined that they should beware of the
doctrine of the Pharisees.<note place='foot'>Matt. xvi.</note>
</p>

<p>
But in the present instance does our Savior alter
His language when He finds His words taken in
the literal sense? Does He tell His hearers that
<pb n="291"/><anchor id="Pg291"/>
He has spoken figuratively? Does He soften the
tone of His expression? Far from weakening the
force of His words He repeats what He said before,
and in language more emphatic: <q>Amen,
amen, I say unto you, Unless ye eat the flesh of
the Son of man, and drink His blood, ye shall not
have life in you.</q>
</p>

<p>
When our Savior beheld the Jews and many of
His disciples abandoning Him, turning to the
chosen twelve, He said feelingly to them: <q>Will
ye also go away? And Simon Peter answered
Him: Lord, to whom shall we go? Thou hast the
words of eternal life.</q><note place='foot'>John
vi. 68, 69.</note> You, my dear reader,
must also take your choice. Will you reply with
the Jews, or with the disciples of little faith, or
with Peter? Ah! let some say with the unbelieving
Jews: <q>How can this man give us His flesh to
eat?</q> Let others say with the unfaithful disciples:
<q>This is a hard saying. Who can hear it?</q>
But do you say with Peter: <q>Lord, to whom shall
we go? Thou hast the words of eternal life.</q>
</p>

<p>
So far I have dwelt on the words of the Promise.
I shall now proceed to the words of the Institution,
which are given in almost the same expressions by
St. Matthew, St. Mark and St. Luke. In the Gospel
according to St. Matthew we read the following
narrative: <q>And while they were at supper,
Jesus took bread, and blessed and broke and gave
to His disciples and said: Take ye and eat. This
is My body. And taking the chalice, He gave
thanks and gave to them, saying: Drink ye all of
this; for this is My blood of the New Testament,
which shall be shed for many unto remission of
sins.</q><note place='foot'>Matt. xxvi. 26-28.</note>
</p>

<p>
I beg you to recall to mind the former text relative
to the Promise and to compare it with this.
<pb n="292"/><anchor id="Pg292"/>
How admirably they fit together, like two links in
a chain! How faithfully has Jesus fulfilled the
Promise which He made! Could any idea be expressed
in clearer terms than these: This is My
body; this is My blood?
</p>

<p>
Why is the Catholic interpretation of these
words rejected by Protestants? Is it because the
text is in itself obscure and ambiguous? By no
means; but simply because they do not comprehend
how God could perform so stupendous a
miracle as to give His body and blood for our
spiritual nourishment.
</p>

<p>
Is, then, the power or the mercy of God to be
measured by the narrow rule of the human understanding?
Is the Almighty not permitted to do
anything except what we can sanction by our reason?
Is a thing to be declared impossible because
we cannot see its possibility?
</p>

<p>
Has not God created the heavens and the earth
<emph>out of nothing</emph> by the fiat of His word? What a
mystery is this! Does He not hold this world in
the midst of space? Does He not transform the
tiny blade into nutritious grain? Did He not feed
upwards of five thousand persons with five loaves
and two fishes? What a mystery! Did He not
rain down manna from heaven for forty years to
feed the children of Israel in the desert? Did He
not change rivers into blood in Egypt, and water
into wine at the wedding of Cana? Does he not
daily make devout souls the tabernacles of the
Holy Ghost? And shall we have the hardihood to
deny, in spite of our Lord's plain declaration, that
God, who works these wonders, is able to change
bread and wine into His body and blood for the
food of our souls?
</p>

<p>
You tell me it is a mystery above your comprehension.
A mystery, indeed. A religion that rejects
<pb n="293"/><anchor id="Pg293"/>
a revealed truth because it is incomprehensible
contains in itself the seeds of dissolution and
will end in rationalism. Is not everything around
us a mystery? Are we not a mystery to ourselves?
Explain to me how the blood circulates in your
veins, how the soul animates and permeates the
whole body, how the hand moves at the will of the
soul. Explain to me the mystery of life and
death.
</p>

<p>
Is not the Scripture full of incomprehensible
mysteries? Do you not believe in the Trinity&mdash;a
mystery not only above, but apparently contrary
to, reason? Do you not admit the Incarnation&mdash;that
the helpless infant in Bethlehem was God? I
understand why Rationalists, who admit nothing
above their reason, reject the Real Presence; but
that Bible Christians should reject it is to me incomprehensible.
</p>

<p>
But do those who reject the Catholic interpretation
explain this text to their own satisfaction:
<q>This is My body, etc?</q> Alas! here their burden
begins. Only a few years after the early Reformers
had rejected the Catholic doctrine of the
Eucharist no fewer than one hundred meanings
were given to these words: <q>This is My body.</q>
It is far easier to destroy than to rebuild.
</p>

<p>
Let me now offer you some additional reasons
in favor of the Catholic or literal sense. According
to a common rule observed in the interpretation
of the Holy Scripture, we must always take
the words in their literal signification, unless we
have some special reason which obliges us to accept
them in a figurative meaning. Now, in the
present instance, far from being forced to employ
the words above quoted in a figurative sense, every
circumstance connected with the delivery of them
<pb n="294"/><anchor id="Pg294"/>
obliges us to interpret them in their plain and
literal acceptation.
</p>

<p>
To whom did our Savior address these words?
At what time and under what circumstances did
He speak? He was addressing His few chosen disciples,
to whom He promised to speak in future,
not in parables nor in obscure language, but
in the words of simple truth. He uttered these
words the night before His Passion. And when
will a person use plainer speech than at the point
of death?
</p>

<p>
These words: <q>This is My body; this is My
blood,</q> embodied a new dogma of faith which all
were obliged to believe, and a new law which all
were obliged to practice. They were the last will
and testament of our blessed Savior. What language
should be plainer than that which contains
an article of faith? What words should be more
free from tropes and figures than those which enforce
a Divine law? But, above all, where will you
find any words more plain and unvarnished than
those contained in a last will?
</p>

<p>
Now, if we understand these words in their
plain and obvious; that is, in their Catholic, sense,
no language can be more simple and intelligible.
But if we depart from the Catholic interpretation,
then it is impossible to attach to them any reasonable
meaning.
</p>

<p>
We now arrive at the third class of Scripture
texts which have reference to the use or reception
of the Sacrament among the faithful.
</p>

<p>
When Jesus, as you remember, instituted the
Eucharist at His last Supper He commanded His
disciples and their successors to renew, till the
end of time, in remembrance of Him, the ceremony
which He performed. What I have done,
do ye also <q>for a commemoration of Me.</q><note place='foot'>Luke xxii. 19.</note>
</p>

<pb n="295"/><anchor id="Pg295"/>

<p>
We have a very satisfactory means of ascertaining
the Apostolic belief in the doctrine of the
Eucharist by examining what the Apostles did in
commemoration of our Lord. Did they bless and
distribute mere bread and wine to the faithful, or
did they consecrate, as they believed, the body and
blood of Jesus Christ? If they professed to give
only bread and wine in memory of our Lord's
Supper, then the Catholic interpretation falls to
the ground. If, on the contrary, we find the
Apostles and their successors, from the first to the
nineteenth century, professing to consecrate and
dispense the body and blood of Christ, and doing
so by virtue of the command of their Savior, then
the Catholic interpretation alone is admissible.
</p>

<p>
Let St. Paul be our first witness. Represent yourself
as a member of the primitive Christian congregation
assembled in Corinth. About eighteen
years after St. Matthew wrote his Gospel, a letter
is read from the Apostle Paul, in which the following
words occur: <q>The chalice of benediction
which we bless, is it not the communion of the
blood of Christ? and the bread which we break,
is it not the partaking of the body of the Lord?...
For, I have received of the Lord that which
also I delivered to you, that the Lord Jesus, on the
night in which he was betrayed, took bread, and
giving thanks, brake it, and said: Take and eat:
this is My body which shall be delivered for you.
This do for the commemoration of Me. In like
manner also the chalice, after the supper, saying:
This cup is the New Covenant in My blood. This
do ye, as often as ye shall drink, for the commemoration
of Me. For, as often as ye shall eat this
bread, and drink the cup, ye shall show the death
of the Lord until He come. Therefore, whoever
shall eat this bread, or drink the chalice of the
Lord unworthily, <emph>shall be guilty of the body and of
<pb n="296"/><anchor id="Pg296"/>
the blood of the Lord</emph>. But let a man prove himself;
and so let him eat of that bread and drink of
the chalice. For, he who eateth and drinketh unworthily,
eateth and drinketh judgment to himself,
<emph>not discerning the body of the Lord</emph>.</q><note place='foot'>I.
Cor. x. 16, and xi. 23-29.</note>
</p>

<p>
Could St. Paul express more clearly his belief
in the Real Presence than he has done here? The
Apostle distinctly affirms that the chalice and
bread which he and his fellow Apostles bless is a
participation of the body and blood of Christ. And
surely no one could be said to partake of that divine
food by eating ordinary bread. Mark these
words of the Apostle: Whosoever shall take the
Sacrament unworthily <q>shall be guilty of the body
and blood of the Lord.</q> What a heinous crime!
For these words signify that he who receives the
Sacrament unworthily shall be guilty of the sin of
high treason, and of shedding the blood of his
Lord in vain. But how could he be guilty of a
crime so enormous, if he had taken in the Eucharist
only a particle of bread and wine. Would a
man be accused of homicide, in this commonwealth,
if he were to offer violence to the statue or painting
of the governor? Certainly not. In like manner,
St. Paul would not be so unreasonable as to
declare a man guilty of trampling on the blood of
his Savior by drinking in an unworthy manner a
little wine in memory of Him.
</p>

<p>
Study also these words: <q>He who eateth and
drinketh unworthily eateth and drinketh condemnation
to himself, <emph>not discerning the body of the
Lord</emph>.</q> The unworthy receiver is condemned for
not recognizing or discerning in the Eucharist the
body of the Lord. How could he be blamed for
not discerning the body of the Lord, if there were
only bread and wine before him? Hence, if the
<pb n="297"/><anchor id="Pg297"/>
words of St. Paul are figuratively understood, they
are distorted, forced and exaggerated terms, without
meaning or truth. But, if they are taken literally,
they are full of sense and of awful significance,
and an eloquent commentary on the words
I have quoted from the Evangelist.
</p>

<p>
The Fathers of the Church, without an exception,
re-echo the language of the Apostle of the
Gentiles by proclaiming the Real Presence of our
Lord in the Eucharist. I have counted the names
of sixty-three Fathers and eminent Ecclesiastical
writers flourishing between the first and sixth century
all of whom proclaim the Real Presence&mdash;some
by explaining the mystery, others by thanking
God for his inestimable gift, and others by exhorting
the faithful to its worthy reception. From
such a host of witnesses I can select here only a
few at random.
</p>

<p>
St. Ignatius, a disciple of St. Peter, speaking of
a sect called Gnostics, says: <q>They abstain from
the Eucharist and prayer, because they confess
not that the Eucharist and prayer is the flesh of
our Savior Jesus Christ.</q>
</p>

<p>
St. Justin Martyr, in an apology to the Emperor
Antoninus, writes in the second century:
<q>We do not receive these things as common bread
and drink; but as Jesus Christ our Savior was
made flesh by the word of God, even so we have
been taught that the Eucharist is <emph>both the flesh and
the blood of the same incarnate Jesus</emph>.</q>
</p>

<p>
Origen (third century) writes: <q>If thou wilt go
up with Christ to celebrate the Passover, He will
give to thee that bread of benediction, His own
body, and will vouchsafe to thee His own blood.</q>
</p>

<p>
St. Cyril, of Jerusalem (fourth century), instructing
the Catechumens, observes: <q>He Himself
having declared, <emph>This is My body</emph>, who shall
<pb n="298"/><anchor id="Pg298"/>
dare to doubt henceforward? And He having
said, <emph>This is My blood</emph>, who shall ever doubt, saying:
This is not His blood? He once at Cana
turned water into wine, which is akin to blood;
and is He undeserving of belief when He turned
wine into blood?</q> He seems to be arguing with
modern unbelief.
</p>

<p>
St. John Chrysostom, who died in the beginning
of the fifth century, preaching on the Eucharist,
says: <q>If thou wert indeed incorporeal, He would
have delivered to thee those same incorporeal gifts
without covering. But since the soul is united to
the body, He delivers to thee in things perceptible
to the senses the things to be apprehended by the
understanding. How many nowadays say: <q>Would
that they could look upon His (Jesus') form, His
figure, His raiment, His shoes. Lo! thou seest
Him, touchest Him, eatest Him.</q></q>
</p>

<p>
St. Augustine (fifth century), addressing the
newly-baptized, says: <q>I promised you a discourse
wherein I would explain the sacrament of
the Lord's table, which sacrament you even now
behold, and of which you were last night made partakers.
You ought to know what you have received.
The bread which you see on the altar,
after being sanctified by the word of God, is the
body of Christ. That chalice, after being sanctified
by the word of God, is the blood of Christ.</q><note place='foot'>See
<q>Faith of Catholics.</q> Vol. II.</note>
</p>

<p>
But why multiply authorities? At the present
day every Christian communion throughout the
world, with the sole exception of Protestants, proclaim
its belief in the Real Presence of Christ in
the Sacrament.
</p>

<p>
The Nestorians and Eutychians, who separated
from the Catholic Church in the fifth century, admit
the corporeal presence of our Lord in the Eucharist.
<pb n="299"/><anchor id="Pg299"/>
Such also is the faith of the Greek church,
which seceded from us a thousand years ago, of
the Present Russian church, of the schismatic
Copts, the Syrians, Chaldeans, Armenians, and, in
short, of all the Oriental sects no longer in communion
with the See of Rome.
</p>

</div>

<pb n="300"/><anchor id="Pg300"/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc' level1='Chapter XXII. Communion Under One Kind.'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='Chapter XXII.'/>
<head type='sub'>Chapter XXII.</head>
<head>Communion Under One Kind.</head>

<p>
Our Savior gave communion under both
forms of bread and wine to His Apostles
at the last Supper. Officiating Bishops and
Priests are always required, except on Good Friday,
to communicate under both kinds. But even
the clergy of every rank, including the Pope, receive
only of the consecrated bread unless when
they celebrate Mass.
</p>

<p>
The Church teaches that Christ is contained
whole and entire under each species; so that whoever
communicates under the form of bread <emph>or</emph> of
wine receives not a mutilated Sacrament or a
divided Savior, but shares in the whole Sacrament
as fully as if he participated in both forms.
Hence, the layman who receives the consecrated
Bread partakes as copiously of the body and blood
of Christ as the officiating Priest who receives
both consecrated elements.
</p>

<p>
Our Lord says: <q>I am the living bread which
came down from Heaven. If any man eat of this
bread, he shall live forever; and the bread which I
will give is My flesh, for the life of the world....
He that eateth Me the same also shall live by Me.
He that eateth this bread shall live forever.</q><note place='foot'>John
vi. 51, and seq.</note>
</p>

<p>
From this passage it is evident that whoever
partakes of the form of bread partakes of the living
<pb n="301"/><anchor id="Pg301"/>
flesh of Jesus Christ, which is inseparable from
His blood, and which, being now in a glorious
state, cannot be divided; for, <q>Christ rising from
the dead, dieth now no more.</q><note place='foot'>Rom.
vi. 9.</note> Our Lord, in His
words quoted, makes no reference to the sacramental
cup, but only to the Eucharistic bread, to
which He ascribes all the efficacy which is attached
to communion under both kinds, viz., union with
Him, spiritual life, eternal salvation.
</p>

<p>
St. Paul, writing to the Corinthians, says:
<q>Whosoever shall eat this bread, <emph>or</emph> drink the
chalice of the Lord unworthily, shall be guilty of
the body <emph>and</emph> of the blood of the Lord.</q><note place='foot'>I.
Cor. xi. 27.</note> The
Apostle here plainly declares that, by an unworthy
participation in the Lord's Supper, under the
form of either bread or wine, we profane both the
body and the blood of Christ. How could this be
so, unless Christ is entirely contained under each
species? So forcibly, indeed, did the Apostle assert
the Catholic doctrine that the Protestant
translators have perverted the text by rendering
it: <q>Whosoever shall eat this bread <emph>and</emph> drink the
chalice,</q> substituting <emph>and</emph> for <emph>or</emph>, in contradiction
to the Greek original, of which the Catholic version
is an exact translation.
</p>

<p>
It is also the received doctrine of the Fathers
that the Eucharist is contained in all its integrity
either in the consecrated bread or in the chalice.
St. Augustine, who may be taken as a sample of
the rest, says that <q>each one receives Christ the
Lord <emph>entire</emph> under each particle.</q><note place='foot'>Aug.
De consec. dist.</note>
</p>

<p>
Luther himself, even after his revolt, was so
clearly convinced of this truth that he was an uncompromising
advocate of communion under one
kind. <q>If any Council,</q> he says, <q>should decree
or permit both species, we would by no means
<pb n="302"/><anchor id="Pg302"/>
acquiesce; but, in spite of the Council and its statute,
we would use one form, or neither, and never
both.</q><note place='foot'>De formula Missæ.</note>
</p>

<p>
Leibnitz, the eminent Protestant divine, observes:
<q><emph>It cannot be denied</emph> that Christ is received
entire by <emph>virtue</emph> of concomitance, under each
species; nor is His flesh separated from His
blood.</q><note place='foot'>Systema Theol., p. 250.</note>
</p>

<p>
As the same virtue is contained in the Sacrament,
whether administered in one or both forms,
the faithful gain nothing by receiving under both
kinds, and lose nothing by receiving under one
form. Consequently, we nowhere find our Savior
requiring the communion to be administered to the
faithful under both forms; but He has left this
matter to be regulated by the wisdom and discretion
of the Church, as He has done with regard to
the manner of administering Baptism.
</p>

<p>
Our Redeemer, it is true, has said: <q>Drink ye
all of this.</q> But it should be remembered that
these words were addressed not to the people at
large, but only to the Apostles, who alone were
also commanded, on the same occasion, to consecrate
His body and blood in remembrance of Him.
Now we have no more right to infer that the faithful
are obliged to drink of the cup, because the
Apostles were commanded to drink of it, than we
have to suppose that the laity are required or allowed
to consecrate the bread and wine, because
the power of doing so was at the last Supper conferred
on the Apostles.
</p>

<p>
It is true also that our Lord said to the people:
<q>Unless ye eat the flesh of the Son of man, and
drink His blood, ye shall not have life in you.</q>
But this command is literally fulfilled by the laity
when they partake of the consecrated bread, which,
as we have seen, contains Christ the Lord in all
<pb n="303"/><anchor id="Pg303"/>
His integrity. Hence, if our Savior has said:
<q>Whoso eateth My flesh, and drinketh My blood,
hath everlasting life,</q> He has also said: <q>The
bread which I will give is My flesh, for the life of
the world.</q>
</p>

<p>
It seems to me that the charge of withholding
the cup comes with very bad grace from Protestant
teachers, who destroy the whole intrinsic virtue
of the Sacrament by giving to their followers
nothing but bread and wine. The difference between
them and us lies in this&mdash;that under one
form we give the <emph>substance</emph>, while they under two
forms confessedly give only the <emph>shadow</emph>.
</p>

<p>
In examining the history of the Church on the
subject we find that up to the twelfth century communion
was sometimes distributed in one form,
sometimes in another, commonly in both.
</p>

<p>
First&mdash;St. Luke tells us that the converts of
Jerusalem <q>were persevering in the doctrine of
the Apostles, and in the communion of bread (as
the Eucharist was sometimes familiarly called),
and in prayer.</q><note place='foot'>Acts ii.
42.</note> Again he speaks of the Christian
disciples assembled at Troas on the Lord's day,
<q>to break bread.</q><note place='foot'>Ibid. xx.
7.</note> We are led to conclude from
these passages that the Apostles sometimes distributed
the communion in the form of bread
alone, as no reference is made to the cup.
</p>

<p>
It was certainly the custom to carry to the sick
only the consecrated Host. Surely if there is any
period of life when nothing should be neglected
which conduces to salvation it is the time of approaching
death. Eusebius tells us that the aged
Serapion received only the Sacred Bread at the
hands of the Priest. In the <hi rend='italic'>Life</hi> of St. Ambrose
we are told that in his last illness the consecrated
Host alone was given to Him.
</p>

<pb n="304"/><anchor id="Pg304"/>

<p>
The Christians in time of persecution, confessors
of the faith confined in prison, travellers on
their journey, soldiers before engaging in battle
and hermits living in the desert were permitted to
keep with them and to fortify themselves with the
consecrated Bread&mdash;as Tertullian, Cyprian, Basil,
Ambrose and other Fathers of the Church testify.
</p>

<p>
Moreover, the Mass of the <hi rend='italic'>Presanctified</hi>, celebrated
in the Latin church on Good Friday only,
and in the Greek church on every day in Lent, except
Saturdays and Sundays, the officiating Priest
receives the consecrated Bread alone.<note place='foot'>Alzog's
Hist., Vol. I., p. 721.</note>
</p>

<p>
In all these instances the communicants never
doubted that they received the Lord's Supper in
its integrity. Surely the conscientious guides of
the faith would sooner withhold altogether the
Sacred Host from their flocks than permit them
to partake of a mutilated Sacrament.
</p>

<p>
Second&mdash;In the primitive days of the Church
the Holy Communion used to be imparted to infants,
but only in the form of wine. The Priest
dipped his finger in the consecrated chalice and
gave it to be sucked by the infant. This custom
prevails to this day among the schismatic Christians
of all Oriental rites. In some instances the
Sacred Host, saturated in the cup, is given to the
child.<note place='foot'>Denziger, Rit. Orientales.</note>
</p>

<p>
Third&mdash;Public Communion was, indeed, usually
administered in the first ages under both forms.
The faithful, however, had the privilege of dispensing
with the cup and of partaking only of the
bread until the time of Pope Gelasius, in the fifth
century, when this general, but hitherto optional,
practice of receiving under both kinds was enforced
as a law for the following reason:
</p>

<p>
The Manichean sect abstained from the cup on
<pb n="305"/><anchor id="Pg305"/>
the erroneous assumption that the use of wine was
sinful. Pope Gelasius, in order to detect and condemn
the error of those sectaries, left it no longer
optional with the faithful to receive under one or
both forms, but ordained that all should communicate
under both kinds.
</p>

<p>
This law continued in force for several ages, but
towards the thirteenth century, for various causes,
it had gradually grown into disuse, with the tacit
approval of the Church. The Council of Constance,
which convened in 1414, established a law
requiring the faithful to communicate under the
form of bread only; and in taking this step, the
Council was actuated both by reasons of propriety
and of religion.
</p>

<p>
The wide-spread diffusion of Christianity
throughout the world had rendered it very difficult
to supply all the faithful with the consecrated
wine. Such inconvenience is scarcely felt by Protestant
communicants, whose numbers are limited
and who ordinarily communicate only on certain
Sundays of each month. The Catholics of the
world, on the contrary, number about three hundred
millions; and as communion is administered
to some of the faithful almost every day
in most of our churches and chapels, and as the
annual communions in every parish church are
generally at least twice as numerous as its aggregate
Catholic population, the sum total of annual
communions throughout the globe may be estimated
in round numbers at not less than five hundred
millions. What effort would be required to
procure altar-wine for such a multitude? In my
missionary journeys through North Carolina I
have often found it no easy task to provide for the
celebration of Mass a sufficiency of pure wine,
<pb n="306"/><anchor id="Pg306"/>
which is essential for the validity of the sacrifice.
This embarrassment would be increased beyond
measure if the cup had to be extended to the laity,
and still more in the coal regions, where the cultivation
of the grape is unknown and where imported
wine is exclusively used.<note place='foot'>While Protestants
consider the cup as an indispensable
part of the communion service, they do not seem, in many instances,
to be very particular as to what the cup will contain.
And the New York <hi rend='italic'>Independent</hi>, of September 21, 1876, relates
the following incident: <q>A late English traveler found a Baptist
mission church, in far-off Burmah, using for the communion
service Bass's pale ale instead of wine. The opening
of the frothing bottle on the communion table seemed
not quite decorous to the visitor, who presented the pastor
with a half-dozen bottles of claret for sacramental use.</q></note>
</p>

<p>
It would be very distasteful, besides, for so
many communicants to drink successively out of
the same chalice, which would be unavoidable if the
Sacrament were administered in both forms. In
our larger churches, where communion is distributed
every Sunday to hundreds, there would be
great danger of spilling a portion of the consecrated
chalice and of thus exposing it to profanation.
</p>

<p>
But above all, as the Church in the fifth century,
through her chief Pastor, Gelasius, enforced the
use of the cup to expose and reprobate the error
of the Manichees, who imagined that the use of
wine was sinful; so in the fifteenth century she
withdrew the cup to condemn the novelties of the
Calixtines, who taught that the consecrated wine
was necessary for a valid communion. Should circumstances
ever justify or demand a change from
the present discipline the Church will not hesitate
to restore the cup to the laity.
</p>

</div>

<pb n="307"/><anchor id="Pg307"/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc' level1='Chapter XXIII. The Sacrifice Of The Mass.'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='Chapter XXIII.'/>
<head type='sub'>Chapter XXIII.</head>
<head>The Sacrifice Of The Mass.</head>

<p>
Sacrifice is the oblation or offering made
to God of some sensible object, with the destruction
or change of the object, to denote
that God is the Author of life and death. Thus,
in the Old Law, before the coming of Christ, when
the Hebrew people wished to offer sacrifice to God
they took a lamb or some other animal, which they
slew and burned its flesh, acknowledging by this
act that the Lord was the supreme Master of life
and death. The ancients offered to God two kinds
of sacrifices, viz., living creatures, such as bulls,
lambs and birds; and inanimate objects, such as
wheat and barley, and, in general, the first fruits
of the earth.
</p>

<p>
All nations&mdash;whether Jews, idolaters or Christians,
except Mahometans and modern Protestants&mdash;have
made sacrifice their principal act of
worship. If you go back to the very dawn of creation,
you will find the children of Adam offering
sacrifices to God. Abel offered to the Lord the
firstlings of his flock, and Cain offered of the fruits
of the earth.<note place='foot'>Gen. iv.</note>
</p>

<p>
When Noe and his family are rescued from the
deluge which had spread over the face of the earth
his first act on issuing from the ark, when the
waters disappear, is to offer holocausts to the
<pb n="308"/><anchor id="Pg308"/>
Lord, in thanksgiving for his preservation.<note place='foot'>Gen. viii.</note> Abraham,
the great father of the Jewish race, offered
victims to the Almighty at His express command.<note place='foot'>Ibid. xv.</note>
We read that Job was accustomed to offer holocausts
to the Lord, to propitiate His favor in behalf
of his children, and to obtain forgiveness for
the sins they might have committed.<note place='foot'>Job. i.</note>
</p>

<p>
When Jehovah delivered to Moses the written
law on Mount Sinai He gave His servant the most
minute details with regard to all the ceremonies to
be observed in the sacrifices which were to be offered
to Him. He prescribed the kind of victims
to be immolated, the qualifications of the Priests
who were to minister at the altar, and the place
and manner in which the victims were to be
offered. Hence, it was the custom of the Jewish
Priests to slay every day two lambs as a sacrifice
to God,<note place='foot'>Numb. xxviii.</note>
and in doing this they were prefiguring
the great sacrifice of the New Law, in which we
daily offer up on the altar <q>the Lamb of God, who
taketh away the sins of the world.</q>
</p>

<p>
In a word, in all their public calamities&mdash;whenever
they were threatened by their enemies; whenever
they were about to engage in war; whenever
they were visited by any plague or pestilence&mdash;the
Jews had recourse to God by solemn sacrifices.
Like the Catholic Church of the present day, they
had sacrifices not only for the living, but also for
the dead; for we read in Sacred Scripture that
Judas Machabeus ordered sacrifice to be offered
up for the souls of his men who were slain in
battle.<note place='foot'>II. Mac. xii. 43-46.</note>
</p>

<p>
We find sacrifices existing not only among the
Jews, who worshiped the true God, but also
among Pagan and idolatrous nations.
<pb n="309"/><anchor id="Pg309"/>
No matter how confused, imperfect or erroneous
was their knowledge of the Deity, the Pagan nations
retained sufficient vestiges of primitive tradition
to admonish them of their obligation of appeasing
the anger and invoking the blessings of the
Divinity by victims and sacrifices. Plutarch, an
ancient writer of the second century, says of these
heathen people: <q>You may find cities without
walls, without literature and without the arts and
sciences of civilized life; but you will never find a
city without Priests and altars, or which has not
sacrifices offered to the gods.</q>
</p>

<p>
The Indians of our own country were accustomed
to offer sacrifice to the Great Spirit, as
Father Jogues and other pioneer missionaries inform
us. But all those ancient sacrifices were only
the types and figures of the great Sacrifice of the
New Law, from which they derived all their efficacy,
just as the Old Law itself was the type of the
New Law of grace. Since the ancient sacrifices
were but figures and shadows, they were imperfect
and insufficient; for <q>it is impossible,</q> says St.
Paul, <q>that by the blood of oxen and of goats sins
should be taken away. Wherefore, when He
(Jesus) cometh into the world, He saith: Sacrifice
and oblation Thou wouldst not, but a body Thou
hast fitted to me. Holocausts for sin did not please
Thee. Then said I: Behold, I come.</q><note place='foot'>Heb.
x. 4, 7.</note> As if He
should say: The blood of oxen and of goats is not
sufficient to appease Thy vengeance, and to cleanse
Thy people from their sins; therefore I come, that
I may offer Myself an acceptable sacrifice for the
sins of the world.
</p>

<p>
The Prophet Isaiah declared that the Jewish
sacrifices had become displeasing to God and
would be abolished. <q>To what purpose,</q> says the
<pb n="310"/><anchor id="Pg310"/>
Lord by His prophet, <q>do you offer Me the multitude
of your victims?... I desire not holocausts
of rams, ... and blood of calves and lambs and
buck-goats ... Offer sacrifice no more in vain.</q><note place='foot'>Isaiah
i. 11-13.</note>
</p>

<p>
But did God, in rejecting the Jewish oblations,
intend to abolish sacrifices altogether? By no
means. On the contrary, He clearly predicts, by
the mouth of the Prophet Malachias, that the immolations
of the Jews would be succeeded by a
clean victim, which would be offered up not on a
single altar, as was the case in Jerusalem, but in
every part of the known world. Listen to the significant
words addressed to the Jews by this
prophet: <q>I have no pleasure in you, saith the
Lord of hosts, and I will not receive a gift of your
hand. For, from the rising of the sun, even to the
going down, My name is great among the Gentiles,
and in every place there is sacrifice, and there is
offered to My name a clean oblation; for My Name
is great among the Gentiles, saith the Lord of
hosts.</q><note place='foot'>Mal. i. 10,
11.</note> The prophet here clearly foretells that
an acceptable oblation would be offered to God not
by Jews, but by Gentiles; not merely in Jerusalem,
but in every place from the rising to the
setting of the sun. These prophetic words must
have been fulfilled. Where shall we find the fulfilment
of the prophecy?
</p>

<p>
We may divide the inhabitants of the world into
five different classes of people, professing different
forms of religion&mdash;Pagans, Jews, Mohammedans,
Protestants and Catholics. Among which of
these shall we find the clean oblation of which the
prophet speaks? Not among the Pagan nations;
for they worship false gods, and consequently cannot
have any sacrifice pleasing to the Almighty.
Not among the Jews; for they have ceased to sacrifice
<pb n="311"/><anchor id="Pg311"/>
altogether, and the words of the prophet
apply not to the Jews, but to the Gentiles. Not
among the Mohammedans; for they also reject sacrifices.
Not among any of the Protestant sects; for
they all distinctly repudiate sacrifices. Therefore,
it is only in the Catholic Church that is fulfilled
this glorious prophecy; for whithersoever you go,
you will find the clean oblation offered on Catholic
altars. If you travel from America to Europe, to
Oceanica, to Africa, or Asia, you will see our
altars erected, and our Priests daily fulfilling the
words of the prophets by offering the <q>clean
oblation</q> of the body and blood of Christ.
</p>

<p>
This oblation of the New Law is commonly
called <hi rend='italic'>Mass</hi>. The word Mass is derived by some
from the Hebrew term <hi rend='italic'>Missach</hi> (Deut. xvi.), which
means a free offering. Others derive it from the
word <hi rend='italic'>Missa</hi>, which the Priest uses when he announces
to the congregation that Divine Service is
over. It is an expression indelibly marked on our
English tongue from the origin of our language,
and we find it embodied in such words as <hi rend='italic'>Candlemas</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Michaelmas</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Martin-mas</hi>
and <hi rend='italic'>Christmas</hi>.
</p>

<p>
The sacrifice of the Mass is the consecration of
the bread and wine into the body and blood of
Christ, and the oblation of this body and blood to
God, by the ministry of the Priest, for a perpetual
memorial of Christ's sacrifice on the cross. The
Sacrifice of the Mass is identical with that of the
cross, both having the same victim and High
Priest&mdash;Jesus Christ.
</p>

<p>
The only difference consists in the manner of
the oblation. Christ was offered up on the cross
in a bloody manner, and in the Mass He is offered
up in an unbloody manner. On the cross He purchased
our ransom, and in the Eucharistic Sacrifice
the price of that ransom is applied to our
<pb n="312"/><anchor id="Pg312"/>
souls. Hence, all the efficacy of the Mass is derived
from the sacrifice of Calvary.
</p>

<p>
It was on the night before He suffered that our
Lord Jesus Christ instituted the Sacrifice of the
New Law. <q>Jesus,</q> says St. Paul, <q>the night in
which He was betrayed took bread, and, giving
thanks, broke and said: Take ye and eat; this is
My body which shall be delivered for you. This
do for the commemoration of Me. In like manner
also the chalice, after He had supped, saying:
This chalice is the new testament in My blood.
This do ye, as often as you shall drink, for the commemoration
of Me; for as often as ye shall eat this
bread, and drink the chalice, ye shall show the
death of the Lord until He come.</q><note place='foot'>I. Cor. xi. 23-26.</note>
</p>

<p>
From these words we learn that the principal
motive which our Savior had in view in instituting
the Sacrifice of the Altar was to keep us in perpetual
remembrance of His sufferings and death.
He wished that the scene of Calvary should ever appear
in panoramic view before our eyes, and that
our heart, memory and intellect should be filled
with the thoughts of His Passion. He knew well
that this would be the best means of winning our
love and exciting sorrow for sin in our soul;
therefore, He designed that in every church
throughout the world an altar should be erected,
to serve as a monument of His mercies to His
people, as the children of Israel erected a monument,
on crossing the Jordan, to commemorate
His mercies to His chosen people. The Mass is
truly the memorial service of Christ's Passion.
</p>

<p>
In compliance with the command of our Lord
the adorable Sacrifice of the Altar has been daily
renewed in the Church, from the death of our
<pb n="313"/><anchor id="Pg313"/>
Savior till the present time, and will be perpetuated
till time shall be no more.
</p>

<p>
In the Acts it is said that while Saul and others
were ministering (or, as the Greek text expresses
it, <emph>sacrificing</emph>) to the Lord, and fasting, the Holy
Spirit said to them: <q>Set apart for Me Saul and
Barnabas.</q> St. Paul, in his Epistle to the Hebrews,
frequently alludes to the Sacrifice of the
Mass. <q>We have an altar,</q> he says, <q>"whereof
they cannot eat who serve the tabernacle.</q><note place='foot'>Heb.
xiii. 10.</note> The
Apostle here plainly declares that the Christian
church has its altars as well as the Jewish synagogue.
An altar necessarily supposes a sacrifice,
without which it has no meaning. The Apostle
also observes that the priesthood of the New Law
was substituted for that of the Old Law.<note place='foot'>Ibid. vii. 12.</note>
Now, the principal office of Priests has always been to
offer sacrifice. Priest and sacrifice are as closely
identified as judge and court.
</p>

<p>
St. Paul, after David, calls Jesus <q>a Priest forever,
according to the order of Melchisedech.</q><note place='foot'>Ps.
cix. 4; Heb. v. 6.</note>
He is named a <emph>Priest</emph> because He offers sacrifice;
a Priest <emph>forever</emph> because His sacrifice is perpetual;
<emph>according to the order of Melchisedech</emph> because
He offers up consecrated bread and wine,
which were prefigured by the bread and wine offered
by <q>Melchisedech, the Priest of the Most
High God.</q><note place='foot'>Gen. xiv. 18.</note>
</p>

<p>
Tradition, with its hundred tongues, proclaims
the perpetual oblation of the Sacrifice of the Mass,
from the time of the Apostles to our own days. If
we consult the Fathers of the Church, who have
stood like faithful sentinels on the watch-towers of
Israel, guarding with a jealous eye the deposit of
faith, and who have been the faithful witnesses of
<pb n="314"/><anchor id="Pg314"/>
their own times and the recorders of the past; if
we consult the General Councils, at which were assembled
the venerable hierarchy of Christendom,
they will all tell us, with one voice, that the Sacrifice
of the Mass is the centre of their religion and
the acknowledged institution of Jesus Christ.
</p>

<p>
Another remarkable evidence in favor of the
Divine institution of the Mass is furnished by the
Nestorians and Eutychians, who separated from
the Catholic Church in the fifth century, and who
still exist in Persia and in other parts of the East,
as well as by the Greek schismatics, who severed
their connection with the Church in the ninth century.
All these sects, as well as the numerous
others scattered over the East, retain to this day
the oblation of the Mass in their daily service. As
these Christian communities have had no communication
with the Catholic Church since the
period of their separation from her, they could
not, of course, have borrowed from her the doctrine
of the Eucharistic Sacrifice; consequently
they must have received it from the same source
from which the Church derived it, viz., from the
Apostles themselves.
</p>

<p>
But of all proofs in favor of the Apostolic origin
of the Sacrifice of the Mass, the most striking and
the most convincing is found in the Liturgies of
the Church. The Liturgy is the established Ritual
of the Church. It is the collection of the authorized
prayers of divine worship. These prayers
are fixed and immovable. Among others we have
the Liturgy of Jerusalem, ascribed to the Apostle
St. James; the Liturgy of Alexandria, attributed
to St. Mark the Evangelist, and the Liturgy of
Rome, referred to St. Peter. There are various
other Liturgies accredited to the Apostles or to
their immediate successors. Now I wish to call
<pb n="315"/><anchor id="Pg315"/>
your attention to this remarkable fact, that all
these Liturgies, though compiled by different persons,
at different times, in various places, and in
divers languages, contain, without exception, in
clear and precise language, the prayers to be said
at the celebration of Mass; prayers in substance
the same as those found in our prayer books at the
Canon of the Mass.
</p>

<p>
We cannot account for this wonderful uniformity
except by supposing that the doctrine respecting
the Mass was received by the Apostles from
the common fountain of Christianity&mdash;Jesus
Christ Himself.
</p>

<p>
It was such facts as these that opened the eyes
of those eminent English divines who, during the
present century, have abandoned heresy and
schism and rich preferments and who have embraced
the Catholic faith, though, by taking such a
step, they had to sacrifice all that was dear to
them on earth.
</p>

<p>
The following passages from St. Paul's Epistle
to the Hebrews are sometimes urged as an argument
against the sacrifice of the Mass: <q>Christ, ...
neither by the blood of goats, or of calves,
but by His own blood, entered once into the Holies,
having obtained eternal redemption.</q> <q>Nor yet
that He should offer Himself often, as the High
Priest entereth into the Holies every year.</q><note place='foot'>Heb. ix. 25.</note>
Again: <q>Every Priest standeth, indeed, daily
ministering, and often offering the same sacrifices,
which can never take away sins, but this Man, offering
one sacrifice for sin, forever sitteth at the
right hand of God.</q><note place='foot'>Ibid. x. 11, 12.</note>
</p>

<p>
St. Paul says that Jesus was offered once. How,
then, can we offer Him daily? I answer, that
Jesus was offered once in a bloody manner, and it
<pb n="316"/><anchor id="Pg316"/>
is of this sacrifice that the Apostle speaks. But
in the Sacrifice of the Mass He is offered up in an
unbloody manner. Though He is daily offered on
ten thousand altars, the Sacrifice is the same as
that of Calvary, having the same High Priest and
victim&mdash;Jesus Christ. The object of St. Paul is
to contrast the Sacrifice of the New Law, which
has only one victim, with the sacrifices of the Old
Law, where the victims were many; and to show
the insufficiency of the ancient sacrifices and the
all-sufficiency of the Sacrifice of the new dispensation.
</p>

<p>
But if the sacrifice of the cross is all-sufficient
what need then, you will say, is there of a commemorative
Sacrifice of the Mass? I would ask a
Protestant in return, Why do you pray, and go to
church, and why were you baptized, and receive
Communion, and the rite of Confirmation? What
is the use of all these exercises, if the sacrifice of
the cross is all-sufficient? You will tell me that in
all these acts you apply to yourself the merits of
Christ's Passion. I will tell you, in like manner,
that in the Sacrifice of the Mass I apply to myself
the merits of the sacrifice of the cross, from which
the Mass derives all its efficacy. Christ, indeed, by
His death made full atonement for our sins, but He
has not released us from the obligation of co-operating
with Him by applying His merits to our
souls. What better or more efficacious way can we
have of participating in His merits than by assisting
at the Sacrifice of the Altar, where we
vividly recall to mind His sufferings, where Calvary
is represented before us, where <q>we show
the death of the Lord until He come,</q> and where
we draw abundantly to our souls the fruit of His
Passion by drinking of the same blood that was
shed on the cross?
</p>

<pb n="317"/><anchor id="Pg317"/>

<p>
In the Old Law there were different kinds of
sacrifices offered up for different purposes. There
were sacrifices of praise and thanksgiving to God
for His benefits, sacrifices of propitiation to implore
His forgiveness for the sins of the people,
and sacrifices of supplication to ask His blessing
and protection. The Sacrifice of the Mass fulfils
all these ends. It is a sacrifice of praise and
thanksgiving, a sacrifice of propitiation and of
supplication; hence that valued book, the <q><hi rend='italic'>Following
of Christ</hi>,</q> says: <q>When a Priest celebrates
Mass he honors God, he rejoices the angels, he
edifies the church, he helps the living, he obtains
rest for the dead, and makes himself a partaker
of all that is good.</q> To form an adequate
idea of the efficiency of the Divine Sacrifice of the
Mass we have only to bear in mind the Victim that
is offered&mdash;Jesus Christ, the Son of the living
God.
</p>

<p>
First&mdash;The Mass is a sacrifice of praise and
thanksgiving. If all human beings in this world,
and all living creatures, and all inanimate objects
were collected and burned as a holocaust to the
Lord, they would not confer as much praise on the
Almighty as a single Eucharistic sacrifice. These
earthly creatures&mdash;how numerous and excellent
soever&mdash;are finite and imperfect; while the offering
made in the Mass is of infinite value, for it is
our Lord Jesus, the acceptable Lamb without
blemish, the beloved Son in whom the Father is
well pleased, and who <q>is always heard on account
of His reverence.</q>
</p>

<p>
With what awe and grateful love should we
assist at this Sacrifice! The angels were present
at Calvary. Angels are present also at the Mass.
If we cannot assist with the seraphic love and rapt
attention of the angelic spirits, let us worship, at
<pb n="318"/><anchor id="Pg318"/>
least, with the simple devotion of the shepherds
of Bethlehem and the unswerving faith of the
Magi. Let us offer to our God the golden gift of
a heart full of love and the incense of our praise
and adoration, repeating often during the holy
oblation the words of the Psalmist: <q>The mercies
of the Lord I will sing forever.</q>
</p>

<p>
Second&mdash;The Mass is also a sacrifice of propitiation.
Jesus daily pleads our cause in this
Divine oblation before our Heavenly Father. <q>If
any man sin,</q> says St. John, <q>we have an Advocate
with the Father, Jesus Christ the just; and
He is the propitiation for our sins; and not for
ours only, but also for those of the whole world.</q><note place='foot'>I.
John ii. 1, 2.</note>
Hence the Priest, whenever he offers up the holy
sacrifice, recites this prayer at the offertory:
<q>Receive, O holy Father, almighty, eternal God,
this immaculate victim which I, Thy unworthy
servant, offer to Thee, my living and true God, for
my innumerable sins, offences and negligences, for
all here present, and for all the faithful living and
dead, that it may avail me and them to life everlasting.</q>
</p>

<p>
Whenever, therefore, we assist at Mass let us
unite with Jesus Christ in imploring the mercy
of God for our sins. Let us represent to ourselves
the Mass as another Calvary, which it is in
reality. Like Mary, let us stand in spirit beneath
the cross, and let our souls be pierced with grief
for our transgressions. Let us acknowledge that
our sins were the cause of that agony and of the
shedding of that precious blood. Let us follow in
mind and heart that crowd of weeping penitents
who accompanied our Savior to Calvary, striking
their breasts, and let us say: <q>Spare, O Lord,
spare Thy people.</q> Or let us repeat with the publican
<pb n="319"/><anchor id="Pg319"/>
this heartfelt prayer: <q>O God, be merciful
to me a sinner.</q> At the death of Jesus the sun
was darkened, the earth trembled, the very rocks
were rent, as if to show that even inanimate
nature sympathized with the sufferings of its God.
And should not we tremble for our sins? Should
not our hearts, though cold and hard as rocks, be
softened at the spectacle of our God suffering for
love of us, and in expiation for our offences?
</p>

<p>
Third&mdash;The Sacrifice of the Mass is, in fine, a
sacrifice of supplication: <q>For, if the blood of
goats and of oxen, and the ashes of a heifer being
sprinkled, sanctify such as are defiled to the
cleansing of the flesh, how much more shall
the blood of Christ, who, through the Holy Ghost,
offered himself without spot to God, cleanse our
conscience from dead works to serve the living
God?</q><note place='foot'>Heb. ix. 13,
14.</note> If the prayers of Moses and David and
the Patriarchs were so powerful in behalf of
God's servants, what must be the influence of
Jesus' intercession? If the wounds of the Martyrs
plead so eloquently for us, how much more eloquent
is the blood of Jesus shed daily upon our
altars? His blood cries louder for mercy than
the blood of Abel cried for vengeance. If God
inclines His ear to us miserable sinners, how can
He resist the pleadings in our behalf of the <q>Lamb
of God who taketh away the sins of the world.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Let us go, therefore, with confidence to the
throne of grace, that we may obtain mercy and
find grace in seasonable aid.</q><note place='foot'>Heb. iv. 16.</note>
</p>

</div>

<pb n="320"/><anchor id="Pg320"/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc' level1='Chapter XXIV. The Use Of Religious Ceremonies
Dictated By Right Reason.'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='Chapter XXIV.'/>
<head type='sub'>Chapter XXIV.</head>
<head>The Use Of Religious Ceremonies Dictated By Right Reason.</head>

<p>
By religious ceremonies we mean certain
expressive signs and actions which the
Church has ordained for the worthy celebration
of the Divine service.
</p>

<p>
True devotion must be interior and come from
the heart, for <q>the true adorers shall adore the
Father in spirit and in truth. For the Father
indeed seeketh such to worship Him. God is a
spirit; and they who worship Him must worship
Him in spirit and in truth.</q><note place='foot'>John
iv. 23, 24.</note> But we are not to
infer from this that exterior worship is to be contemned
because interior worship is prescribed as
essential. On the contrary, the rites and ceremonies
enjoined in the worship of God and the
administration of the Sacraments are dictated by
right reason, are sanctioned by Almighty God in
the Old Law, and by Christ and His Apostles in
the New.
</p>

<p>
The angels, being pure spirits without a body,
render to God a purely spiritual worship. The
sun, moon and stars of the firmament pay Him a
kind of external homage. In the Prophet Daniel
we read: <q>Sun and moon bless the Lord, ...
<pb n="321"/><anchor id="Pg321"/>
stars of heaven bless the Lord, praise and exalt
Him above all forever.</q><note place='foot'>Dan.
iii. 62, 63. Though this passage is omitted in the
Protestant Bible, it is retained in the Book of Common
Prayer.</note> <q>The heavens show
forth the glory of God, the firmament announces
the work of His hands.</q><note place='foot'>Psalm.
xviii. 1.</note> Man, by possessing a soul
of spiritual substance, partakes of the nature of
angels, and by possessing a body partakes of the
nature of the heavenly bodies. It is therefore, his
privilege, as well as his duty, to offer to God the
twofold homage of body and soul; in other words,
to honor Him by internal and external worship.
</p>

<p>
Genuine piety cannot long be concealed in the
heart without manifesting itself by exterior practices
of religion; hence, though interior and exterior
worship are distinct, they cannot be separated
in the present life. Fire cannot burn without sending
forth flame and heat. Neither can the fire of
devotion burn in the soul without being reflected
on the countenance and even in speech. It is natural
for man to express his sentiments by signs and
ceremonies, for <q>from the fulness of the heart the
mouth speaketh;</q> and as fuel is necessary to keep
fire alive, even so the flame of piety is nourished
by the outward forms of religion.
</p>


<p>
A devoted child will not be content with loving
his father in his heart, but will manifest that love
by affectionate language, and by the service of his
body, if necessary. So will the child of God show
his affection for his heavenly Father not only by
interior devotion, but also by the homage of his
body. <q>I beseech you,</q> says the Apostle, <q>by the
mercy of God, that you present your bodies, a living
sacrifice, holy pleasing unto God, your reasonable
service.</q><note place='foot'>Rom. xii. 1.</note>
</p>

<pb n="322"/><anchor id="Pg322"/>

<p>
The fruit of a tree does not consist in its bark,
its leaves and its branches. Nevertheless, you
never saw a tree bearing fruit unless when clothed
with bark, adorned with branches and covered
with leaves. These are necessary for the protection
of the fruit. In like manner, though the fruit
of piety does not consist in exterior forms, it must,
however, be fostered by some outward observances
or it will soon decay. There is as close a
relation between devotion and ceremonial as exists
between the bark and the fruit of a tree.
</p>

<p>
The man who daily bends his knee to the Maker,
who recites or sings His praises, who devoutly
makes the sign of the cross, who assists without
constraint at the public services of the Church,
who observes an exterior decorum in the house of
God, who gives to the needy according to his means
and duly attends to the other practices and ceremonies
of religion, will generally be one whose
heart is united to God, and who yields to Him a
ready obedience. Show me, on the contrary, a man
who habitually neglects these outward observances
of religion and charity, and I will show you one in
whose soul the fire of devotion, if not quite extinguished,
at least burns very faintly.
</p>

<p>
The ceremonies of the Church not only render
divine service more solemn, but also rivet our attention
and lift it up to God. Our mind is so
active, so volatile, so full of distractions, our imagination
so fickle, that we have need of some
external objects on which to fix our thoughts.
</p>

<p>
Almighty God considered ceremonial so indispensable
to interior worship that we find Him
in the Old Law prescribing in minute detail the
various rites, ceremonies and ordinances to be
observed by the Jewish Priests and people in
their public worship. What is the entire book
<pb n="323"/><anchor id="Pg323"/>
of Leviticus but an elaborate ritual of the Jewish
church. Not, indeed, that external rites are to be
compared in merit with interior worship, but because
they are as necessary for nourishing internal
devotion as food is necessary for our animal life.
</p>

<p>
Our Savior, though He came to establish a more
spiritual religion than that of the Hebrew people,
did not discard the outward forms of worship. He
was accustomed to accompany His religious acts
by appropriate ceremonies.
</p>

<p>
In the garden of Gethsemani <q>He fell upon His
face</q><note place='foot'>Matt. xxvi.</note> in humble supplication.
</p>

<p>
He went in procession to Jerusalem, accompanied
by a great multitude, who sang Hosanna to the
Son of David.<note place='foot'>Ibid. xxi.</note>
</p>

<p>
At the Last Supper He invoked a blessing on the
bread and wine, and afterward chanted a hymn
with His disciples.<note place='foot'>Ibid. xxvi.</note>
</p>

<p>
When the deaf and dumb man was brought to
Him, before healing Him, He put His fingers into
his ears and touched his tongue with spittle, <q>and,
looking up to heaven, He groaned and said:
Ephpheta, which is, Be thou opened.</q><note place='foot'>Mark vii.</note>
</p>

<p>
When He imparted the Holy Ghost to His disciples,
He breathed on them<note place='foot'>John xx.</note> and the same Apostles
afterward communicated the Holy Ghost to
others by laying hands on them.<note place='foot'>Acts viii.</note>
</p>

<p>
The Apostle St. James directs that if any man
is sick he shall call in the Priest, who will anoint
him with oil.<note place='foot'>James v.</note>
</p>

<p>
Now, are not all these acts which I have just
recorded&mdash;the prostration and procession, the
prayerful invocation, the chanting of a hymn, the
touching of the ears, the lifting up of the eyes to
<pb n="324"/><anchor id="Pg324"/>
heaven, the breathing on the Apostles, the laying
on of hands and the unction of the sick&mdash;are not
all these acts so many ceremonies serving as models
to those which the Catholic Church employs in
her public worship, and in the administration of
her Sacraments?
</p>

<p>
The ceremonies now accompanying our public
worship are, indeed, usually more impressive and
elaborate than those recorded of our Savior; but
it is quite natural that the majesty of ceremonial
should keep pace with the growth and development
of Christianity.
</p>

<p>
But where shall we find a ritual so gorgeous as
that presented to us in the Book of Revelation,
which is descriptive of the worship of God in the
heavenly Jerusalem? Angels with golden censers
stand before the throne, while elders cast their
crowns of gold before the Lamb once slain. Then
that unnumbered multitude of all nations, tongues
and people, clothed in white raiment, bearing palms
of victory. Virgins, too, with harp and canticle,
follow near the Lamb, singing the new song which
they alone can utter.<note place='foot'>Apocalypse, passim.</note>
</p>

<p>
How glorious the pageant! How elaborate in
detail!
</p>

<p>
Surely there ought to be some analogy and resemblance,
some proportion and harmony between
the public worship which is paid to God in the
Church militant on earth, and that which is offered
to Him in the Church triumphant in heaven.
</p>

<p>
Strange would it be if God, who, in the dispensation
past and that to come, is seen delighting in
external majesty, should have deprived the Christian
Church (the living link between the past and
the future) of all external glory. <q>For,</q> as St.
Paul says, <q>if the ministry of condemnation is
<pb n="325"/><anchor id="Pg325"/>
glory, much more the ministry of justice aboundeth
in glory.</q><note place='foot'>II. Cor. iii. 9.</note>
</p>

<p>
It is true that God uttered this complaint against
the children of Israel: <q>This people draw near Me
with their mouth and honor Me with their lips,
but their heart is far from Me.</q><note place='foot'>Isaiah
xxix. 13.</note> It is also true
that He was displeased with their sacrifices and
religious festivals.<note place='foot'>Ibid. i.
72.</note> But He blamed them not because
they praised Him with their voice, but because
their hearts felt not what their lips uttered.
He rejected their sacrifices because they were not
accompanied by the more precious sacrifice of a
penitent spirit.
</p>

<p>
The same Lord who declares that the true adorer
shall adore the Father in spirit commands also that
public praise be given to Him in His holy temple:
<q>Praise ye the Lord,</q> He says, <q>in His holy
places.... Praise Him with sound of trumpet.
Praise Him with psaltery and harp. Praise Him
with timbrel and choir. Praise Him with strings
and organs.</q><note place='foot'>Ps. cl.</note>
</p>

<p>
If He says in one place: <q>Rend your hearts and
not your garments,</q><note place='foot'>Joel ii.
13.</note> immediately after He adds:
<q>Blow the trumpet in Sion, sanctify a fast, call a
solemn assembly. Gather together the people,
sanctify the Church.... Between the porch and
the altar the Priests, the Lord's ministers, shall
weep and shall say: Spare, O Lord, spare Thy
people!</q><note place='foot'>Ibid. ii.
15-17.</note> The Prophet first points out the absolute
necessity of interior sorrow and contrition
of heart, and then he insists on the duty of
performing some acts of expiation, penance
and humiliation, as you do when you have your
<pb n="326"/><anchor id="Pg326"/>
forehead marked with ashes on Ash Wednesday,
and when you observe the fast and abstinence of
Lent.
</p>

<p>
When St. Paul says that though he speak with
the tongues of angels and of men, and distribute
all his goods to feed the poor, and deliver his body
to be burned, and have not the love of God, it
profiteth him nothing,<note place='foot'>I.
Cor. xiii.</note> he points out the necessity
of interior worship. And when he says elsewhere
that <q>in the name of Jesus every knee should bend
of those that are in heaven, on earth and under the
earth,</q><note place='foot'>Phil. ii.
10.</note> he shows us the duty of exterior or ceremonial
worship.
</p>

<p>
When political leaders desire to influence the
masses in their favor they are not content with addressing
themselves to the intellect. They appeal
also to the feelings and imagination. They have
torchlight processions, accompanied by soul-stirring
music discoursing popular airs. They have
flags and banners floating in the breeze. They have
public meetings, at which they deliver patriotic
speeches to arouse the enthusiasm of the people.
</p>

<p>
What these men do for political reasons the
Church performs from the higher motives of religion.
Therefore, she has her solemn processions.
She has her heavenly music to soften the heart and
raise it to God. She consecrates her sacred banners,
especially the cross, the banner of salvation.
She preaches with a hundred tongues, speaking
not only to our head and heart by the Word of God,
but to our feelings and imagination by her grand
and imposing ceremonial.
</p>

</div>

<pb n="327"/><anchor id="Pg327"/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc' level1='Chapter XXV. Ceremonials Of The Mass.'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='Chapter XXV.'/>
<head type='sub'>Chapter XXV.</head>
<head>Ceremonials Of The Mass.</head>

<p>
Let us now, dear reader, walk together into a
Catholic Church in time to assist at the late
Mass, which is the most solemn service of
the Catholic Liturgy. Meantime, I shall endeavor
to explain to you the principal objects which attract
your attention.
</p>

<p>
As we enter I dip my fingers into a vase placed
at the church door, and filled with holy water, and
I make the sign of the cross, praying at the same
time to be purified from all defilement, so that with
a clean heart I may worship in God's holy temple.
</p>

<p>
The Church, through her ministers, blesses
everything used in her service; for, St. Paul says,
that <q>Every creature of God is good, ... that is
received with thanksgiving, for it is sanctified by
the word of God and by prayer.</q><note place='foot'>I. Tim. iv. 4.</note>
</p>

<p>
Before Mass begins the Priest sprinkles the assembled
congregation with holy water, reciting
at the same time these words of the fiftieth
Psalm: <q>Thou shalt sprinkle me with hyssop, and
I shall be cleansed; Thou shalt wash me, and I
shall be made whiter than snow.</q>
</p>

<p>
The practice of using blessed water dates back
<pb n="328"/><anchor id="Pg328"/>
to a very remote antiquity, and is alluded to by
several Fathers of the primitive Church.
</p>

<p>
As we advance up the aisle you observe
lying open on the altar a large book, which is
called a <hi rend='italic'>Missal</hi>, or Mass-book, because it contains
the prayers said at Mass. The office of the Mass
consists of selections from the Old and the New
Testament, the Canon and other appropriate
prayers. The Canon of the Mass never varies
throughout the year, and descends to us from the
first ages of the Church with scarcely the addition
of a word. Nearly all the collects are also very
old, many of them dating back to a period prior
to the seventh century. I am acquainted with no
prayers that can compare with the collects of the
Missal in earnestness and vigor of language, in
conciseness of style and unction of piety. It is
evident that their authors were men who felt what
they said and were filled with the spirit of God,
despising <q>the persuasive words of human wisdom,</q>
unlike so many modern prayer-composers
whose rounded periods are directed rather to
tickle the ears of men than to pierce the clouds.
</p>

<p>
You are probably familiar with the Episcopal
<hi rend='italic'>Book of Common Prayer</hi>, and have no doubt admired
its beautiful simplicity of diction. But
perhaps you will be surprised when I inform you
that this Prayer-Book is for the most part a
translation from our Missal.
</p>

<p>
Let us now reverently follow the officiating
Priest through the service of the Mass.
</p>

<p>
You see him advance from the sacristy and
stand at the foot of the altar, where he makes an
humble confession of his sins to God and His
saints. He then ascends the altar, and nine times
the Divine clemency is invoked in the <hi rend='italic'>Kyrie Eleison,
Christe Eleison</hi>. He intones the sublime doxology,
<pb n="329"/><anchor id="Pg329"/>
<hi rend='italic'>Gloria in Excelsis Deo</hi>, sings the collects of
the day, reads the Lesson or Epistle and chants
the Gospel, after which the sermon is usually
preached. Next he recites the Nicene Creed,
which for upwards of fifteen centuries has been
resounding in the churches of Christendom. Then
you perceive him making the oblation of the bread
and wine. He washes the tips of his fingers, reciting
the words of the Psalmist: <q>I will wash my
hands among the innocent and will encompass
Thy altar, O Lord.</q> He is admonished, by this
ceremony, to be free from the least stain, in view
of the sacred act he is going to perform. The
Preface and Canon follow, including the solemn
words of consecration, during which the bread
and wine are changed by the power of Jesus
Christ into His body and blood. He proceeds with
other prayers, including the best of all, the <hi rend='italic'>Our
Father</hi>, as far as the Communion, when he partakes
of the consecrated Bread and chalice, giving
the Holy Communion afterward to such as are
prepared to receive it. He continues the Mass,
gives his blessing to the kneeling congregation,
and concludes with the opening words of the sublime
Gospel of St. John.
</p>

<p>
Here you have not merely a number of prayers
strung together, but you witness a scene which
rivets pious attention and warms the heart into
fervent devotion. You participate in an act of
worship worthy of God, to whom it is offered.
</p>

<p>
But you are anxious that I should explain to
you the reason why the Mass is said in Latin.
When Christianity was first established the
Roman Empire ruled the destinies of the world.
Pagan Rome had dominion over nearly all Europe
and large portions of Asia and Africa. The
Latin was the language of the Empire. Wherever
<pb n="330"/><anchor id="Pg330"/>
the Roman standard was planted, there also
was spread the Latin tongue; just as at the present
time the English language is spoken wherever
the authority of Great Britain or of the United
States is established.
</p>

<p>
The Church naturally adopted in her Liturgy,
or public worship, the language which she then
found prevailing among the people. The Fathers
of the early Church generally wrote in the Latin
tongue, which thus became the depository of the
treasures of sacred literature in the Church.
</p>

<p>
In the fifth century came the disruption of the
Roman Empire. New kingdoms began to be
formed in Europe out of the ruins of the old empire.
The Latin gradually ceased to be a living
tongue among the people, and new languages commenced
to spring up like so many shoots from the
parent stock. The Church, however, retained in
her Liturgy, and in the administration of the
Sacraments, the Latin language for very wise reasons,
some of which I shall briefly mention:
</p>

<p>
First&mdash;The Catholic Church has always <emph>one and
the same faith</emph>, the same form of public worship,
the same spiritual government. As her doctrine
and liturgy are unchangeable, she wishes that the
language of her Liturgy should be fixed and uniform.
Faith may be called the jewel, and language
is the casket which contains it. So careful is
the Church of preserving the jewel intact that she
will not disturb even the casket in which it is set.
Living tongues, unlike a dead language, are continually
changing in words and meaning. The
English language as written four centuries ago
would be now almost as unintelligible to an English
reader as the Latin tongue. In an old Bible
published in the fourteenth century St. Paul calls
<pb n="331"/><anchor id="Pg331"/>
himself <hi rend='italic'>the villain of Jesus Christ</hi>. The word
<hi rend='italic'>villain</hi> in those days meant a servant, but the term
would not be complimentary now to one even less
holy than the Apostle. This is but one instance,
out of many which I might adduce, to show the
mutations which our language has undergone. But
the Latin, being a dead language, is not liable to
these changes.
</p>

<p>
Second&mdash;The Catholic Church is spread over the
whole world, embracing in its fold children of all
climes and nations, and peoples and tongues under
the sun. How, I ask, could the Bishops of these
various countries communicate with one another
in council if they had not one language to serve as
a common medium of communication? It would
be simply impossible. A church that is universal
must have a universal tongue; whilst a national
church, or a church whose members speak one and
the same language, and whose doctrines conveniently
change to suit the times, can safely adopt
the vernacular tongue in its liturgy.
</p>

<p>
A few years ago a Convocation was held in England,
composed of British and American Episcopal
Bishops. They had no difficulty in communicating
with one another because all spoke their mother
tongue. But suppose they had representatives
from Spain, France and Germany. The lips of
those Continental Bishops would be sealed because
they could not speak to their English brothers;
their ears also would be sealed because they could
not comprehend what was said to them.
</p>

<p>
In 1869, at the Ecumenical Council of the Vatican,
were assembled Bishops from all parts of the
world speaking all the civilized languages of
Christendom. Had those Bishops no uniform
language to express their thoughts, public debates
and familiar conversation among them would have
<pb n="332"/><anchor id="Pg332"/>
been impracticable. The Council Chamber would
have been a confused Babel of tongues. But,
thanks to the Latin language, which they all spoke
(except a few Orientals), their speeches were as
plainly understood as if each had spoken in his
native dialect.
</p>

<p>
Third&mdash;Moreover, the Bishops and Clergy of
the Catholic Church are in frequent correspondence
with the Holy See. This requires that they
should communicate in one uniform language,
otherwise the Pope would be compelled to employ
secretaries speaking every language in Christendom.
</p>

<p>
But if the Priest says Mass in an unknown
tongue, are not the people thereby kept in ignorance
of what he says, and is not their time wasted
in Church? We are forced to smile at such
charges, which are flippantly repeated from year
to year. These assertions arise from a total ignorance
of the Mass. Many Protestants imagine that
the essence of public worship consists in a sermon.
Hence, to their minds, the primary duty of a congregation
is to listen to a discourse from the
pulpit. Prayer, on the contrary, according to
Catholic teaching, is the most essential duty of a
congregation, though they are also regularly instructed
by sermons. Now, what is the Mass? It
is not a sermon, but it is a sacrifice of prayer
which the Priest offers up to God for himself and
the people. When the Priest says Mass he is
speaking not to the people, but to God, to whom all
languages are equally intelligible.
</p>

<p>
The congregation, indeed, could not be expected
to hear the Priest, even if he spoke in English,
since his face is turned from them, and the greater
part of what he says is pronounced in an undertone.
And this was the system of worship God
<pb n="333"/><anchor id="Pg333"/>
ordained in the ancient dispensation, as we learn
from the Old Testament and from the first chapter
of St. Luke. The Priest offered sacrifice and
prayed for the people in the sanctuary, while they
prayed at a distance in the court. In all the
schismatic churches of the East the Priest in the
public service prays not in the vulgar, but in a
dead language. Such, also, is the practice in the
Jewish synagogues at this day. The Rabbi reads
the prayers in Hebrew, a language with which
many of the congregation are not familiar.
</p>

<p>
But is it true that the people do not understand
what the Priest says at Mass? Not at all. For,
by the aid of an English Missal, or any other
Manual, they are able to follow the officiating
clergyman from the beginning to the end of the
service.
</p>

<p>
You also observe <emph>lighted tapers</emph> on the altar, and
you desire to know for what purpose they are
used.
</p>

<p>
In the Old Law the Almighty Himself ordained
that lighted chandeliers should adorn the tabernacle.<note place='foot'>Exod.
xxv. 31, and seq.</note>
Assuredly, that cannot be improper in
the New Dispensation which God sanctioned in the
Old.
</p>

<p>
The lights upon our altars have both a historical
and a symbolical meaning. In the primitive
days of the Church Christianity was not tolerated
by the Pagan world. The Christians were,
consequently, obliged to assemble for public worship
in the Catacombs of Rome and other secret
places. These Catacombs, or subterranean rooms,
still exist, and are objects of deep interest to the
pious stranger visiting the Eternal City. As these
hidden apartments did not admit the light of the
sun, the faithful were obliged to have lights even
<pb n="334"/><anchor id="Pg334"/>
in open day. In commemoration of the event the
Church has retained the use of lights on her altars.
</p>

<p>
Lighted candles have also a symbolical meaning.
They represent our Savior, who is <q>the light of
the world,</q> <q>who enlighteneth every man that
cometh into the world,</q> without whom we should
be wandering in darkness and in the shadow of
death.
</p>

<p>
They also serve to remind us to <q>let our light
so shine before men (by our good example) that
they may see our good works and glorify our
Father who is in heaven.</q>
</p>

<p>
Lights are used, too, as a sign of spiritual joy.
St. Jerome, who lived in the fourth century, remarks:
<q>Throughout all the Churches of the East,
before the reading of the Gospel, candles are
lighted at mid-day, not to dispel darkness, but as
a sign of joy.</q>
</p>

<p>
You also noticed the Priest incensing the altar.
Incense is a striking emblem of prayer, which
should ascend to heaven from hearts burning with
love, just as the fragrant smoke ascends from the
censer. <q>Let my prayer,</q> says the Royal
Prophet, <q>ascend like incense in Thy sight.</q><note place='foot'>Ps. cxl.</note>
God enjoined in the Old Law the use of incense:
<q>Aaron shall burn sweet-smelling incense upon the
altar in the morning.</q><note place='foot'>Exod.
xxx. 7.</note> Hence we see the Priest
Zachariah <q>offer incense on going into the temple
of the Lord. And all the multitude were praying
without at the hour of incense.</q><note place='foot'>Luke i. 9, 10.</note>
</p>

<p>
You perceive that the altar is decorated today
with <emph>vases and flowers</emph> because this is a festival of
the Church. There is one spot on earth which
can never be too richly adorned, and that is the
sanctuary in which our Lord vouchsafes to dwell
among us. Nothing is too good, nothing too beautiful,
<pb n="335"/><anchor id="Pg335"/>
nothing too precious for God. He gives us
all we possess, and the least we can do in return
is to ornament that spot which He has chosen for
His abode upon earth. The Almighty, it is true,
has no need of our gifts. He is rich without them.
<q>The earth is the Lord's and the fulness thereof.</q>
Nevertheless, He is pleased to accept our offerings
when they are bestowed upon Him as a mark of
our affection, just as a father joyfully receives
from his child a present bought with his own
means. Our Savior gratefully accepted the
treasures of the Magi, though he could have done
without such gifts. Some persons, when they see
our sanctuary sumptuously decorated, will exclaim:
Would it not have been better to give to
the poor the money spent in purchasing these
things? So complained Judas (though caring not
for the poor<note place='foot'>John xii.
6.</note>) when Mary poured from an alabaster
vase the precious ointment on the feet of an
approving Savior. Why should not we imitate
Mary by placing at His feet, around His sanctuary,
our vases with their chaste and fragrant
flowers, that the Church may be filled with their
perfume, as Simon's house was filled with the odor
of the ointment?
</p>

<p>
Does not the Almighty at certain seasons adorn
with lilies and flowers of every hue this earth,
which is the great temple of nature? And what
is more appropriate than that we should on special
occasions embellish our sanctuary, the place which
He has chosen for His habitation among us? It
is sweet to snatch from the field its fairest treasures
wherewith to beautify the temple made with
hands.
</p>

<p>
The <emph>sacred vestments</emph> which you saw worn by
the officiating Priest must have struck you as very
<pb n="336"/><anchor id="Pg336"/>
antique and out of fashion. Nor is this surprising,
for if you saw a lady enter church today with
a head-dress such as worn in the days of Queen
Elizabeth, her appearance would look to you very
singular. Now, our priestly vestments are far
older in style than the days of Queen Elizabeth;
much older even than the British Empire. Eusebius
and other writers of the fourth century speak
of them as already existing in their times. It is
no wonder, therefore, that these vestments look
odd to the unfamiliar eye.
</p>

<p>
In the Old Law God prescribed to the Priests
the vestments which they should wear while engaged
in their sacred office: <q>And these shall be
the vestments which they shall make (for the
Priest): a rational and an ephod, a tunic and a
straight linen garment, a mitre and a girdle. They
shall make the holy vestments for thy brother
Aaron and his sons, that they may do the office of
priesthood unto Me.</q><note place='foot'>Exod.
xxviii. 4.</note> Guided by Heaven, the
Church also prescribes sacred garments for her
ministering Priests; for it is eminently proper and
becoming that the minister of God, while engaged
in the sacred mysteries, should be arrayed in garments
which would constantly impress upon him
his sacred character and remind him, as well as
the congregation, of the sublime functions he is
performing.
</p>

<p>
The vestments worn by the Priest while celebrating
Mass are an amict, or white cloth around
the neck; an alb, or white garment reaching to his
ankles, and bound around his waist by a cincture;
a maniple suspended from his left arm; a stole,
which is placed over his shoulders and crossed at
the breast; and a chasuble, or large outer garment.
</p>

<p>
The chasuble, stole and maniple vary in color
<pb n="337"/><anchor id="Pg337"/>
according to the occasion. Thus, <emph>white</emph> vestments
are used at Christmas, Easter and other festivals
of joy, also on feasts of Confessors and Virgins;
<emph>red</emph> are used at Pentecost and on festivals of Apostles
and Martyrs; <emph>green</emph> from Trinity Sunday to
Advent, on days having no special feast; <emph>purple</emph>
during Lent and Advent, and <emph>black</emph> in Masses for
the dead.
</p>

<p>
One more word on this subject. Only a few
years ago the whole Protestant world was united
in denouncing the use of floral decorations on our
altars, incense, sacred vestments, and even the
altar itself, as abominations of Popery. But of
late a better spirit has taken possession of a respectable
portion of the Protestant Episcopal
church. After having exhausted their wrath
against our vestments, and vilified them as the
rags of the wicked woman of Babylon, the members
of the Ritualistic church have, with remarkable
dexterity, passed from one extreme to the
other. They don our vestments, they swing our
censer, erect altars in their churches and adorn
them with flowers and candle-sticks.
</p>

<p>
These Ritualists are, however, easily discerned
from the true Priest. Should one of them ever
appear before the Father of the faithful in these
ill-fitting robes the venerable Pontiff would exclaim,
with the Patriarch of old: <q>The voice indeed
is the voice of Jacob, but the hands are the
hands of Esau.</q> I feel the garment of the Priest,
but I hear the voice of the parson.
</p>

<p>
God grant that, as our misguided brothers have
assumed our sacerdotal garments, they may adopt
our faith, that their speech may conform to their
dress. Then, having laid aside their earthly
stoles, may they deserve, like all faithful Priests,
to be seen <q>standing before the throne, and in
<pb n="338"/><anchor id="Pg338"/>
sight of the Lamb, with white stoles and palms in
their hands, ... saying: <q>Salvation to our God,
who sitteth upon the throne, and to the Lamb.</q></q><note place='foot'>Apoc.
vii. 9, 10.</note>
</p>

</div>

<pb n="339"/><anchor id="Pg339"/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc' level1='Chapter XXVI. The Sacrament Of Penance.'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='Chapter XXVI.'/>
<head type='sub'>Chapter XXVI.</head>
<head>The Sacrament Of Penance.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head>I. The Divine Institution Of The Sacrament Of Penance.</head>

<p>
The whole history of Jesus Christ is marked
by mercy and compassion for suffering humanity.
From the moment of His incarnation
till the hour of His death every thought and
word and act of His Divine life was directed toward
the alleviation of the ills and miseries of
fallen man.
</p>

<p>
As soon as He enters on His public career He
goes about doing good to all men. He gives sight
to the blind, hearing to the deaf, vigor to paralyzed
limbs; He applies the salve of comfort to the
bleeding heart and raises the dead to life.
</p>

<p>
But, while Jesus occupied Himself in bringing
relief to corporal infirmities, <emph>the principal object
of His mission was to release the soul from the
bonds of sin</emph>. The very name of Jesus indicates
this important truth: <q>Thou shalt call His name
Jesus,</q> says the angel, <q>for He shall save His
people from their sins.</q><note place='foot'>Matt. i. 21.</note>
</p>

<pb n="340"/><anchor id="Pg340"/>

<p>
For, if Jesus had contented Himself with healing
the maladies of our body without attending to
those of our soul, He would deserve, indeed, to be
called our Physician, but would not merit the more
endearing titles of Savior and Redeemer. But as
sin was the greatest evil of man, and as Jesus
came to remove from us our greatest evils, He
came into the world chiefly as the great Absolver
from sin.
</p>

<p>
Magdalen seems to have a consciousness of this.
She casts herself at His feet, which she washes
with her tears and wipes with her hair, while
Jesus pronounces over her the saving words of
absolution. The very demons recognized Jesus
as the enemy of sin, for they dreaded His approach,
knowing that He would drive them out of
the bodies of men.
</p>

<p>
Our Lord makes the healing of the body secondary
to that of the soul. When He delivers the
body from its distempers His object is to win the
confidence of the spectators by compelling them
to recognize Him as the soul's Physician. He
says, for instance, to the palsied man, <q>Thy sins
are forgiven.</q><note place='foot'>Matt. ix.
2.</note> The scribes are offended at our
Savior for presuming to forgive sins. He replies,
in substance: If you do not believe My words, believe
My acts; and He at once heals the man of
his disease. After he had cured the man that had
been languishing for thirty-eight years He whispered
to him this gentle admonition, <q>Sin no more,
lest some worst thing may happen to thee.</q><note place='foot'>John
v. 14.</note>
</p>

<p>
As much as our spiritual substance excels the
flesh that surrounds it, so much more did our
Savior value the resurrection of a soul from the
grave of sin than the resurrection of the body from
that of death. Hence St. Augustine pointedly remarks
<pb n="341"/><anchor id="Pg341"/>
that, while the Gospel relates only three
resurrections of the body, our Lord, during His
mortal life, raised thousands of souls to the life
of grace.
</p>

<p>
As the Church was established by Jesus Christ
to perpetuate the work which he had begun, it follows
that the reconciliation of sinners to God was
to be the principal office of sacred ministers.
</p>

<p>
But the important question here presents itself:
How was man to obtain forgiveness in the Church
after our Lord's ascension?
</p>

<p>
Was Jesus Christ to appear in person to every
sinful soul and say to each penitent, as He said to
Magdalen, <q>Thy sins are forgiven thee,</q> or did
He intend to delegate this power of forgiving sins
to ministers appointed for that purpose?
</p>

<p>
We know well that our Savior never promised
to present Himself visibly to each sinner, nor has
He done so.
</p>

<p>
His plan, therefore, must have been to appoint
ministers of reconciliation to act in His name. It
has always, indeed, been the practice of Almighty
God, both in the Old and the New Law, to empower
human agents to execute His merciful designs.
</p>

<p>
When Jehovah resolved to deliver the children
of Israel from the captivity of Egypt He appointed
Moses their deliverer. When God wished
them to escape from the pursuit of Pharaoh across
the Red Sea, did He intervene directly? No; but,
by His instructions, Moses raised his hand over
the waters and they were instantly divided.
</p>

<p>
When the people were dying from thirst in the
desert, did God come visibly to their rescue? No;
but Moses struck the rock, from which the water
instantly issued. When Paul, breathing vengeance
against the Christians, was going to Damascus,
<pb n="342"/><anchor id="Pg342"/>
did our Savior personally restore his sight,
convert and baptize him? No; He sent Paul to
His servant Ananias, who restored his sight and
baptized him.
</p>

<p>
The same Apostle beautifully describes to us in
one sentence of his Epistle to the Corinthians the
arrangement of Divine Providence in the reconciliation
of sinners: <q>God,</q> he says, <q>hath reconciled
us to Himself through Christ, <emph>and hath given
to us the ministry of reconciliation</emph>.... For
Christ, therefore, we are ambassadors; God, as it
were, exhorting through us.</q><note place='foot'>II.
Cor. v. 18-20.</note> That is to say,
God sends Christ to reconcile sinners; Christ
sends us. We are His ambassadors, reconciling
sinners in His name.
</p>

<p>
When I think of this tremendous power that we
possess I congratulate the members of the Church,
for whose benefit it is conferred; I tremble for myself
and my fellow-ministers, for terrible is our
responsibility, while we have nothing to glory in.
Christ is the living Fountain of grace: we are but
the channels through which it is conveyed to your
souls. Christ is the treasure; we are but the pack-horses
that carry it. <q>We bear this treasure in
earthen vessels.</q> Christ is the shepherd; we are
the pipe He uses to call His sheep. Our words
sounding in the confessional are but the feeble echo
of the voice of the Spirit of God that purified the
Apostles in the cenacle of Jerusalem.
</p>

<p>
But have we Gospel authority to show that our
Savior did confer on the Apostles and their successors
the power to forgive sins?
</p>

<p>
We have the most positive testimony, and our
Savior's words conferring this power are expressed
in the plainest language which admits of
no misconception. In the Gospel of St. Matthew
our Savior thus addresses Peter: <q>Thou art
Peter, and on this rock I will build My Church....
<pb n="343"/><anchor id="Pg343"/>
And I will give to thee the keys of the Kingdom
of Heaven, and whatsoever thou shalt bind
on earth shall be bound also in heaven, and whatsoever
thou shalt loose on earth shall be loosed
also in heaven.</q><note place='foot'>Matt. xvi. 18, 19.</note>
</p>

<p>
And to all the Apostles assembled together on
another occasion He uses the same forcible
language: <q>Whatsoever you shall bind on earth
shall be bound also in heaven, and whatsoever you
shall loose on earth shall be loosed also in
heaven.</q><note place='foot'>Matt. xviii.
18.</note> The soul is enchained by sin. I give
you power, says our Lord, to release the penitent
soul from its galling fetters, and to restore it to
the liberty of a child of God.
</p>

<p>
In the Gospel of St. John we have a still more
striking declaration of the absolving power given
by our Savior to His Apostles.
</p>

<p>
Jesus, after His resurrection, thus addresses
His disciples: <q>Peace be to you. As the Father
hath sent Me, I also send you.... Receive ye
the Holy Ghost; whose sins ye shall forgive, they
are forgiven them, and whose sins ye shall retain,
they are retained.</q><note place='foot'>John xx. 21-23.</note>
</p>

<p>
That peace which I give to you you will impart
to repentant souls as a pledge of their reconciliation
with God. The absolving power I have from
My Father, the same I communicate to you. Receive
the Holy Ghost, that you may impart this
Holy Spirit to souls possessed by the spirit of evil.
<q>If their sins are as scarlet, they shall be made as
white as snow; and if they be red as crimson, they
shall be white as wool.</q><note place='foot'>Isaiah
i. 18.</note> If they are as numerous
as the sands on the seashore, they shall be
blotted out, provided they come to you with contrite
hearts. The sentence of mercy which you
shall pronounce on earth I will ratify in heaven.
</p>

<pb n="344"/><anchor id="Pg344"/>

<p>
From these words of St. John I draw three important
conclusions:
</p>

<p>
It follows, first, that the forgiving power was
not restricted to the Apostles, but extended to
their successors in the ministry unto all times and
places. The forgiveness of sin was to continue
while sin lasted in the world; and as sin, alas! will
always be in the world, so will the remedy for sin
be always in the Church. The medicine will co-exist
with the disease. The power which our Lord
gave the Apostles to preach, to baptize, to confirm,
to ordain, etc., was transmitted by them to their
successors. Why not also the power which they
had received to forgive sins, since man's greatest
need is his reconciliation with God by the forgiveness
of his offences?
</p>

<p>
It follows, secondly that forgiveness of sin was
ordinarily to be obtained only through the ministry
of the Apostles and their successors, just as
it was from them that the people were to receive
the word of God and the grace of Baptism. The
pardoning power was a great prerogative conferred
on the Apostles. But what kind of prerogative
would it be if people could always obtain
forgiveness by confessing to God secretly in their
rooms? How few would have recourse to the
Apostles if they could obtain forgiveness on easier
terms! God says to His chosen ministers: I give
you the keys of My kingdom, that you may dispense
the treasures of mercy to repenting sinners.
But of what use would it be to give the Apostles
the keys of God's treasures for the ransom of
sinners, if every sinner could obtain his ransom
without applying to the Apostles? If I gave you,
dear reader, the keys of my house, authorizing you
to admit whom you please, that they might partake
of the good things contained in it, you would
<pb n="345"/><anchor id="Pg345"/>
conclude that I had done you a small favor if you
discovered that every one was possessed of a private
key, and could enter when he pleased without consulting
you.
</p>

<p>
I have said that forgiveness of sins is <emph>ordinarily</emph>
to be obtained through the ministry of the Apostles
and of their successors, because it may sometimes
happen that the services of God's minister
cannot be obtained. A merciful Lord will not require
in this conjuncture more than a hearty sorrow
for sin joined with a desire of having recourse
as soon as practicable, to the tribunal of Penance;
for God's ordinances bind only such as are able to
fulfil them.
</p>

<p>
It follows, in the third place, that the power of
forgiving sins, on the part of God's minister, involves
the obligation of confessing them on the
part of the sinner. The Priest is not empowered
to give absolution to every one indiscriminately.
He must exercise the power with judgment and
discretion. He must reject the impenitent and
absolve the penitent. But how will he judge of
the disposition of the sinner unless he knows his
sins, and how will the Priest know his sins unless
they are confessed? Hence, we are not surprised
when we read in the Acts that <q>Many of them who
believed came confessing and declaring their
deeds</q><note place='foot'>Acts xix.
18.</note> to the Apostles. Why did they confess
their sins unless they were bound to do so? Hence,
also, we understand why St. John says: <q>If we
confess our sins, He is faithful and just to forgive
us our sins and to cleanse us from all iniquity.</q><note place='foot'>I.
John i. 9.</note>
</p>

<p>
The strength of these texts of Scripture will appear
to you much more forcible when you are told
that all the Fathers of the Church, from the first
to the last, insist upon the necessity of Sacramental
<pb n="346"/><anchor id="Pg346"/>
Confession as a Divine institution. We
are not unfrequently told by those who are little
acquainted with the doctrine and history of
the Church, that Sacramental Confession was not
introduced into the Church until 1,200 years after
the time of our Savior. In vindication of their
bold assertion they even introduce quotations from
SS. Basil, Ambrose, Augustine, Jerome and
Chrysostom. These quotations are utterly irrelevant;
but, if seen in the context, they will tend
to prove, instead of disproving, the Catholic doctrine
of Confession. For the sake of brevity I
shall cite only a few passages from the Fathers
referred to. These citations I take, almost at
random, from the copious writings of these
Fathers on Confession. From these extracts you
can judge of the sentiments of all the Fathers on
the subject of Confession. <q><hi rend='italic'>Ab uno disce omnes.</hi></q>
</p>

<p>
St. Basil writes: <q>In the confession of sins the
same method must be observed as in laying open
the infirmities of the body; for as these are not
rashly communicated to every one, but to those
only who understand by what method they may be
cured, so the confession of sins must be made to
such persons as have the power to apply a
remedy.</q><note place='foot'>In Reg. Brev.,
quæst, ccxxix., T. II., p. 492.</note>
Later on he tells us who those persons
are. <q>Necessarily, our sins must be confessed
to those to whom has been committed the
dispensation of the mysteries of God. Thus, also,
are they found to have acted who did penance of
old in regard of the saints. It is written in the
Acts, they confessed to the Apostles, by whom also
they were baptized.</q><note place='foot'>Ibid.,
cclxxxviii., p. 516.</note> Two conclusions obviously
follow from these passages of St. Basil:
First, the necessity of confession. Second, the
<pb n="347"/><anchor id="Pg347"/>
obligation of declaring our sins to a Priest to
whom in the New Law is committed <q>the dispensation
of the mysteries of God.</q>
</p>

<p>
St. Ambrose, of Milan, writes: <q>The poison is
sin; the remedy, the accusation of one's crime: the
poison is iniquity; confession is the remedy of the
relapse. And, therefore, it is truly a remedy
against poison, if thou declare thine iniquities, that
thou mayest be justified. Art thou ashamed?
This shame will avail thee little at the judgment
seat of God.</q><note place='foot'>See Faith
of Catholics, Vol. III., p. 74 and seq.</note>
</p>

<p>
The following passage clearly shows that the
great Light of the Church of Milan is speaking of
confession to Priests: <q>There are some,</q> continues
St. Ambrose, <q>who ask for penance that
they may at once be restored to Communion.
These do not so much desire to be loosed as to
bind the Priest; for they do not unburden their
conscience, but they burden his, who is commanded
not to give holy things unto dogs&mdash;that is, not
easily to admit impure souls to the Holy Communion.</q><note place='foot'>Apud
Wiseman's Doctrines of the Church.</note>
</p>

<p>
Paulinus, the secretary of St. Ambrose, in his
life of that great Bishop relates that he used to
weep over the penitents whose confessions he
heard.
</p>

<p>
St. Augustine writes: <q>Our merciful God wills
us to confess in this world that we may not be confounded
in the other.</q><note place='foot'>Hom.
xx.</note> And again: <q>Let no one
say to himself, I do penance to God in private, I do
it before God. Is it then in vain that Christ hath
said, <q>Whatsoever thou shalt loose on earth shall
be loosed in heaven?</q> Is it in vain that the keys
have been given to the Church? Do we make void
the Gospel, void the words of Christ?</q><note place='foot'>Sermo cccxcii.</note>
</p>

<pb n="348"/><anchor id="Pg348"/>

<p>
In this extract how well doth the great Doctor
meet the sophistry of those who, in our times, say
that it is sufficient to confess to God!
</p>

<p>
St. Chrysostom, in his thirtieth Homily, says:
<q>Lo! we have now, at length, reached the close of
Holy Lent; now especially we must press forward
in the career of fasting, ... and exhibit a <emph>full</emph> and
<emph>accurate confession of our sins</emph>, ... that with
these good works, having come to the day of Easter,
we may enjoy the bounty of the Lord....
For, as the enemy knows that having confessed our
sins and <emph>shown</emph> our wounds to the <emph>physician</emph> we
attain to an abundant cure, he in an especial manner
opposes us.</q>
</p>

<p>
Again he says: <q>Do not <emph>confess to me</emph> only
of fornication, nor of those things that are manifest
among all men, but bring together also thy
secret calumnies and evil speakings, ... and all
such things.</q><note place='foot'>Tom. vii. Comm. in Matt.</note>
</p>

<p>
The great Doctor plainly enjoins here a detailed
and specific confession of our sins not to God, but
to His minister, as the whole context evidently
shows.
</p>

<p>
The same Father, in an eloquent treatise on the
power of the sacred ministry, uses the following
words: <q rend='pre'>To the Priests is given a power which
God would not grant either to angels or archangels;
inasmuch that what the Priests do below
God ratifies above, and the Master confirms the
sentence of His servants. For, He says, <q>Whose
sins you shall retain, they are retained.</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>What power, I ask, can be greater than this?
The Father hath given all power to the Son; and I
see all this same power delivered to them by God
the Son.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>To cleanse the leprosy of the body, or rather to
<pb n="349"/><anchor id="Pg349"/>
pronounce it cleansed, was given to the Jewish
Priests alone. But to our Priests is granted the
power not of declaring healed the leprosy of the
body, but of absolutely cleansing the defilements
of the soul.</q><note place='foot'>Lib. iii., De Sacerdotio.</note>
</p>

<p>
And again: <q>If a sinner, as becomes him; would
use the aid of his conscience, and hasten to confess
his crimes and disclose his ulcer to his physician,
who may heal and not reproach, and receive
remedies from him; if he would speak to him alone,
without the knowledge of any one, and with care
lay all before him, easily would he amend his
failings; <emph>for the confession of sins is the absolution
of crimes</emph>.</q><note place='foot'>Ibid., Hom. xx.</note>
</p>

<p>
St. Jerome writes: <q>If the serpent, the devil,
secretly bite a man and thus infect him with the
poison of sin, and this man shall remain silent,
and do not penance, nor be willing to make known
his wound to his brother and master; the master,
who has a tongue that can heal, cannot easily serve
him. For if the ailing man be ashamed to open
his case to the physician no cure can be expected;
for medicine does not cure that of which it knows
nothing.</q><note place='foot'>Comment in Eccles.</note>
</p>

<p>
Elsewhere he says: <q>With us the Bishop or
Priest binds or looses&mdash;not them who are merely
innocent or guilty&mdash;but <emph>having heard, as his duty
requires, the various qualities of sin</emph> he understands
who should be bound and who loosed.</q><note place='foot'>Comm. in Matt.</note>
</p>

<p>
Could the Catholic doctrine regarding the power
of the Priests and the obligation of confession be
expressed in stronger language than this?
</p>

<p>
And yet these are the very Fathers who are
represented to be opposed to Sacramental Confession!
With a reckless disregard of the unanimous
<pb n="350"/><anchor id="Pg350"/>
voice of antiquity our adversaries have the hardihood
to assert that private or Sacramental Confession
was introduced at a period subsequent to
the twelfth century. They do not, however, vouchsafe
to inform us by what Pope or Bishop or
Father of the Church, or by what Council, or in
what country, this monstrous innovation was
foisted on the Christian Republic. Surely, an institution
which, in their estimation, has been
fraught with such dire calamity to Christendom,
ought to have its origin marked with more precision.
It is sometimes prudent, however, not to
be too particular in fixing dates.
</p>

<p>
I shall now, I trust, show to the satisfaction of
the reader: First&mdash;That Sacramental Confession
was not introduced. Second&mdash;That it could not
have been introduced into the Church since the
days of the Apostles, and consequently that it is
Apostolic in its origin.
</p>

<p>
That Confession was not invented since the days
of the Apostles is manifest as soon as we attempt
to fix the period of its first establishment. Let us
go back, step, by step, from the nineteenth to the
first century.
</p>

<p>
It had not its origin in the present century, as
everybody will admit.
</p>

<p>
Nor did it arise in the sixteenth century, since
the General Council of Trent, held in that age,
speaks of it as an established and venerable institution
and Luther says that <q>auricular Confession,
as now in vogue, is useful, nay, necessary;
nor would I,</q> he adds, <q>have it abolished, since it
is the remedy of afflicted consciences.</q><note place='foot'>Lib.
de Capt. Babyl. cap de Pœnit.</note> Even
Henry VIII., before he founded a new sect, wrote
a treatise in defence of the Sacraments, including
Penance and Confession.
</p>

<pb n="351"/><anchor id="Pg351"/>

<p>
It was not introduced in the thirteenth century,
for the Fourth Council of Lateran passed a decree
in 1215 obliging the faithful to confess their sins
at least once a year. This decree, of course, supposes
Confession to be already an established fact.
</p>

<p>
Some Protestant writers fall into a common
error in interpreting the decree of the Lateran
Council by saying <q>Sacramental Confession was
never required in the Church of Rome until the
thirteenth century.</q> The Council simply prescribed
a limit beyond which the faithful should
not defer their confession.
</p>

<p>
These writers seem incapable of distinguishing
between a law obliging us to a certain duty and a
statute fixing the time for fulfilling it. They might
as well suppose that the revenue officer creates the
law regarding the payment of taxes when he issues
a notice requiring the revenue to be paid within a
given time.
</p>

<p>
Going back to the ninth century we find that
Confession could not have had its rise then. It
was at that period that the Greek schism took its
rise, under the leadership of Photius. The Greek
schismatic church has remained since then a communion
separate from the Catholic Church, having
no spiritual relations with us. Now, the Greek
church is as tenaciously attached to private Confession
as we are.
</p>

<p>
For the same reasons Confession could not date
its origin from the fifth or fourth century. The
Arians revolted from the Church in the fourth
century, and the Nestorians and Eutychians in the
fifth. The two last-named sects still exist in large
numbers in Persia, Abyssinia and along the coast
of Malabar, and retain Confession as one of their
most sacred and cherished practices.
</p>

<p>
In fine, no human agency could succeed in instituting
<pb n="352"/><anchor id="Pg352"/>
Confession between the first and fourth century,
for the teachings of our Divine Redeemer
and of His disciples had made too vivid an impression
on the Christian community to be easily effaced;
and the worst enemies of the Church admit
that no spot or wrinkle had yet deformed her fair
visage in this, the golden age of her existence.
</p>

<p>
These remarks suffice to convince us that Sacramental
Confession <emph>was not instituted since the
time of the Apostles</emph>. I shall now endeavor to
prove to your satisfaction <emph>that its introduction
into the Church, since the Apostolic age, was absolutely
impossible</emph>.
</p>

<p>
There are two ways in which we may suppose
that error might insinuate itself into the Church,
viz.: suddenly, or by slow process. Now, the introduction
of Confession in either of those ways
was simply impossible.
</p>

<p>
First, nothing can be more absurd than to suppose
that Confession was immediately forced upon
the Christian world. For experience demonstrates
with what slowness and difficulty men are divested
of their religious impressions, whether true or
false. If such is the case with individuals, how
ridiculous would it seem for whole nations to
adopt in a single day some article of belief which
they had never admitted before. Hence, we cannot
imagine, without doing violence to our good
sense, that all the good people of Christendom
went to rest one night ignorant of the Sacrament
of Penance, and rose next morning firm believers
in the Catholic doctrine of auricular Confession.
As well might we suppose that the citizens of the
United States would retire to rest believing they
were living under a Republic, and awake impressed
with the conviction that they were under
the rule of Queen Victoria.
</p>

<pb n="353"/><anchor id="Pg353"/>

<p>
Nor is it less absurd to suppose that the practice
of Confession was introduced by degrees. How
can we imagine that the Fathers of the Church&mdash;the
Clements, the Leos, the Gregories, the Chrysostoms,
the Jeromes, the Basils and Augustines,
those intrepid High Priests of the Lord, who, in
every age, at the risk of persecution, exile and
death have stood like faithful sentinels on the
watch-towers of Israel, defending with sleepless
eyes the outskirts of the city of God from the
slightest attack&mdash;how can we imagine, I say, that
they would suffer the enemy of truth to invade the
very sanctuary of God's temple? If they were
so vigilant in cutting off the least withered branch
of error, how would they tamely submit to see so
monstrous an exotic engrafted on the fruitful tree
of the Church?
</p>

<p>
What gives additional weight to these remarks
is the reflection that Confession is not a speculative
doctrine, but a doctrine of the most practical
kind, influencing our daily actions, words and
thoughts&mdash;a Sacrament to which thousands of
Christians have constant recourse in every part
of the world. It is a doctrine, moreover, hard to
flesh and blood, and which no human power, even
if it had the will, could impose on the human race.
It is only a God that, in such a case, could exact
the homage of our assent.
</p>

<p>
In whatever light, therefore, we view the present
question&mdash;whether we consider the circumstances
of time, place, manner of its introduction&mdash;the
same inevitable conclusion stares us in the
face: that Sacramental confession is not the invention
of man, but the institution of Jesus Christ.
</p>

<p>
But the doctrine of priestly absolution and the
private confession of sins is not confined to the
Roman Catholic and Oriental schismatic churches.
The same doctrine is also taught by a large and
<pb n="354"/><anchor id="Pg354"/>
influential portion of the Protestant Episcopal
Church of England.
</p>

<p>
The Rev. C. S. Grueber, a clergyman of the
Church of England, has recently published a catechism
in which the absolving power of the minister
of God, and the necessity and advantage of
confession, are plainly set forth. I will quote
from the Rev. gentleman's book his identical
words:
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Question.</hi> What do you mean by absolution?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Answer.</hi> The pardon or forgiveness of sin.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Q.</hi> By what special ordinance of Christ are
sins committed after Baptism to be pardoned?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>A.</hi> By the sacrament of absolution.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Q.</hi> Who is the minister of absolution?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>A.</hi> A Priest.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Q.</hi> Do you mean that a Priest can really absolve?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>A.</hi> Yes.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Q.</hi> In what place of the Holy Scripture is it recorded
that Christ gave this power to the priesthood?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>A.</hi> In John xx. 23; see also Matt. xviii. 18.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Q.</hi> What does the prayer-book (or Book of
Common Prayer) say?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>A.</hi> In the office for the ordaining of Priests the
Bishop is directed to say, <q>Receive the Holy
Ghost for the office and work of a Priest in the
Church of God. Whose sins thou dost forgive,
they are forgiven.</q> In the office for the visitation
of the sick it is said, <q>Our Lord Jesus Christ
hath left in His Church power to absolve all sinners
that truly repent and believe in Him.</q> In
the order for morning and evening prayer we say
again, <q>Almighty God hath given power and commandment
to his ministers to declare and pronounce
<pb n="355"/><anchor id="Pg355"/>
to His people, being penitent, the absolution
and remission of their sins.</q>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Q.</hi> For what purpose hath Christ given this
power to Priests to pronounce absolution in His
name?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>A.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>For the consolation of the penitent; the
quieting of his conscience.</hi>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Q.</hi> What must precede the absolution of the
penitent?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>A.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>Confession....</hi> Before absolution
privately given, confession must be made to a Priest
privately.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Q.</hi> In what case does the Church of England
order her ministers to move people to private, or,
as it is called, to auricular confession?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>A.</hi> When they feel their conscience troubled
with any weighty matter.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Q.</hi> What is weighty matter?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>A.</hi> Mortal sin certainly is weighty; sins of
omission or commission of any kind that press
upon the mind are so, too. Anything may be
weighty that causes scruple or doubtfulness.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Q.</hi> At what times in particular does the Church
so order?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>A.</hi> In the time of sickness, <hi rend='italic'>and before coming
to the Holy Communion</hi>.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Q.</hi> Is there any other class of persons to whom
confession is profitable?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>A.</hi> Yes; to those <hi rend='italic'>who desire to lead a saintly
life. These, indeed, are the persons who most frequently
resort to it.</hi>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Q.</hi> Is there any other object in confession, besides
the seeking absolution for past sin and the
quieting of the penitent's conscience?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>A.</hi> Yes; the practice of confessing each single
<pb n="356"/><anchor id="Pg356"/>
sin is a great check upon the commission of sin
and a preservative of purity of life.<note place='foot'>See
<q>A Catechism on the Church.</q> By the Rev. C. S.
Grueber, Hambridge, Diocese of Bath and Wells. London:
Palmer, 1870.</note>
</p>

<p>
Here we have the Divine institution of priestly
absolution and the necessity and advantage of
Sacramental confession plainly taught, not in a
speculative treatise, but in a practical catechism,
by a distinguished minister of the Church of England;
taught by a minister who draws his salary
from the funds of the Protestant Episcopal
church; who preaches and administers in a church
edifice recognized as a Protestant Episcopal
church, and who is in strict communion with a
Bishop of the Protestant Episcopal Church of
England.
</p>

<p>
And these doctrines are upheld, not by one eminent
Divine only, but by hundreds of clergymen, as
well as by thousands of the Protestant Episcopalians
of England.
</p>

<p>
What a strange spectacle to behold the same
church teaching diametrically opposite doctrines!
What is orthodox in the diocese of Bath and Wells
is decidedly heterodox in the diocese of North Carolina.
An ordinance which Rev. Mr. Grueber proclaims
to be of Divine faith is characterized by Rt.
Rev. Bishop Atkinson<note place='foot'>The Protestant
Episcopal Bishop of North Carolina.</note> as the invention of men.
What Dr. Grueber inculcates as a most salutary
practice Dr. Atkinson anathematizes as pernicious
to religion. Confession, which, in the judgment of
the former, is a great <q>check upon the commission
of sin,</q> is stigmatized by the latter as an incentive
to sin. <q>Behold how good and pleasant it is for
brethren to dwell together in unity.</q><note place='foot'>Ps. cxxxii.</note>
</p>

<pb n="357"/><anchor id="Pg357"/>

<p>
Suppose that the venerable Protestant Episcopal
Bishop of North Carolina, in passing through
England, were invited by the Rev. Mr. Grueber to
preach in his church in the morning, and that the
Rt. Rev. Prelate chose for his subject a sermon
on confession; and suppose that the Rev. Mr. Grueber
selected in the evening, as the subject of his
discourse, the doctrine advanced by him in his
catechism.
</p>

<p>
Let us imagine some benighted dissenter attending
Mr. Grueber's church at the morning and evening
service, with the view to being enlightened in
the teachings of the Protestant church. Would
not our dissenter be sorely perplexed, on returning
home at night, as to what the Protestant Episcopal
church really <emph>did teach</emph>?
</p>

<p>
Some Episcopalians are pleased to admit that
confession may be resorted to with spiritual profit
in certain abnormal cases&mdash;for instance, in time of
sickness. So that, in their judgment, a religious
observance which is salutary to a sick man is
pernicious to him in good health. For the life of
me, I cannot see how the circumstances of bodily
health can affect the moral character of a religious
act.
</p>

<p>
That a minister of the Baptist or the Methodist
church should deny the power of priestly absolution
I readily understand, since these churches disclaim,
in their confessions of faith, any such prerogative
for their clergy. But I cannot well conceive
why a Protestant Episcopalian should repudiate
the pardoning power, which is plainly asserted
in his standard prayer-book.
</p>

<p>
Whenever an Episcopalian Bishop imposes
hands on candidates for the ministry he employs
the following words, which are found in the Book
of Common Prayer: <q>Receive the Holy Ghost for
<pb n="358"/><anchor id="Pg358"/>
the office and work of a Priest in the Church of
God, now committed unto thee by the imposition of
our hands. Whose sins thou dost forgive, they
are forgiven; and whose sins thou dost retain, they
are retained.</q><note place='foot'>The Ordering
of Priests.</note> If these words do not mean that
the minister receives by the imposition of the
Bishop's hands the power of forgiving sin, they
mean nothing at all. When the Bishop pronounces
this sentence, either he intends to convey this
power of absolution, or he does not. If he intended
to confer this power, he could not employ
more clear and precise language to express his
idea; if he did not intend to confer this power,
then his language is calculated to mislead.
</p>

<p>
Just imagine that prelate addressing a candidate
for Holy Orders, in the morning, with the
words: <q>Whose sins thou dost forgive they are
forgiven;</q> and after Divine service saying to the
young minister: <q>Remember, sir, you have no
power to forgive sins. The words of ordination
are a mere figure of speech.</q>
</p>

<p>
When a Catholic Bishop ordains Priests he uses
the precise words which I have quoted, because
the Book of Common Prayer borrows them from
our Pontifical. But he means exactly what he
says, viz: That the Priest receives through the
ministration of the Bishop the power of forgiving
sins.
</p>

<p>
To sum up: We have seen that the Sacrament
of Penance and absolution by the Priest is taught
in Scripture, proclaimed by the Fathers, upheld
not only by Roman Catholics throughout the
world, but also by all the schismatic Christians of
the East. It is inculcated in those old and
genuine editions of the <hi rend='italic'>Book of Common Prayer</hi>,
which have not been enervated by being subjected
<pb n="359"/><anchor id="Pg359"/>
to the pruning-knife in this country, and the same
practice is encouraged by an influential portion of
the Protestant Episcopal church in England, and
I will add, also, in the United States.
</p>

<p>
Again, some object to priestly absolution on the
assumption that the exercise of such a function
would be a usurpation of an incommunicable prerogative
of God, who alone can forgive sins. This
was precisely the language addressed by the
Scribes to our Savior. They exclaimed: <q>He
blasphemeth! who can forgive sins but God
only?</q><note place='foot'>Mark ii.
7.</note> My answer, therefore, will be equally
applicable to old and modern objectors. It is not
blasphemy for a Priest to claim the power of forgiving
sins, since he acts as the delegate of the
Most High. It would, indeed, be blasphemous if a
Priest pretended to absolve in his own name and
by virtue of his own authority. But when the
Priest absolves the penitent sinner he acts in the
name, and by the express authority, of Jesus
Christ; for he says: <q>I absolve thee in the name
of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy
Ghost.</q> Let it be understood once for all that
the Priest arrogates to himself no Divine powers.
He is but a feeble voice. It is the Holy Spirit that
operates sanctity in the soul of the penitent.
</p>

<p>
Not a few Protestant Episcopalians, I believe,
still admit that original sin is washed away in the
Sacrament of Baptism. If the minister is not
guilty of blasphemy in being the instrument of
God's mercy, in forgiving sins by Baptism, how
can a Priest blaspheme in being the instrument of
Divine mercy, in absolving sinners in the Sacrament
of Penance? The same Lord who instituted
Baptism for the remission of original sin established
Penance for the forgiveness of sins committed
<pb n="360"/><anchor id="Pg360"/>
after Baptism. Did not the Apostles exercise
Divine power in raising dead bodies to life,
and in raising souls that were dead to the life of
grace? And yet no one but Scribes and Pharisees
accused them of usurping God's powers. Cannot
the Almighty, without derogating from His own
glory, give to men in the nineteenth century privileges
which He accorded to them in the first age
of the Church?
</p>

<p>
Far, then, from dishonoring, we honor God by
having recourse to the earthly physician whom
He has appointed for us, and, like the multitude
in the Gospel, we <q>glorify God, who hath given
such power to men.</q><note place='foot'>Matt. ix. 8.</note>
</p>

<p>
Others object thus: Why confess to a Priest, when
you may confess to God in secret. I will retort by
asking, why do you build fine temples when you can
worship God in the great temple of nature? Why
pray in church when you can pray in your chamber?
Why listen to a minister expounding the
Word of God when you can read the Gospel at your
leisure at home. You answer that the Lord authorizes
these things. So does He authorize priestly
absolution. This objection is not new. It is very old.
</p>

<p>
St. Augustine, who lived fourteen hundred years
ago, will answer the objection for me: <q>Let no one,</q>
remarks this illustrious Doctor, <q>say to himself,
I do penance to God in private; I do it before God.
Is it, then, in vain that Christ has said: <q>Whatsoever
ye shall loose on earth shall be loosed in
heaven</q>? Is it in vain that the keys have been
given to the Church?</q> The question for us is not
what God is able to do, but what <emph>He has willed to
do</emph>. God <emph>might</emph> have adopted other means for the
justification of the sinner, as He might have
created a world different from the present one.
But it is our business to take our Father at His
word, and to have recourse with gratitude to the
<pb n="361"/><anchor id="Pg361"/>
system He has actually established for our justification.
Now, we are assured by His infallible
word that it is by having recourse to His consecrated
ministers that our sins will be forgiven us.<note place='foot'>John xx.</note>
</p>

<p>
It is related in the Book of Kings that Naaman,
the Syrian, was afflicted with a grievous
leprosy, which baffled the skill of the physicians of
his country. He had in his household a Jewish
maid-servant. She spoke to her master of the
great prophet Eliseus, who lived in her native
country, to whom the Lord had given the power of
performing miracles. She besought her master to
consult the prophet. Naaman, accordingly, set
out for the country of Israel and begged Eliseus to
heal him. The prophet told him to go and wash
seven times in the Jordan; but Naaman, instead of
doing as he was directed, became very angry, and
said: <q>I thought he would have come out to me, ...
and touched with his hand the place of the
leprosy, and healed me. Are not the Abana and
the Pharfar rivers of Damascus, better than all
the waters of Israel, that I may wash in them, and
be made clean?</q><note place='foot'>IV. Kings
v.</note> But the servants of Naaman
remonstrated with him, and besought him to comply
with the prophet's injunction, telling him that
the conditions were easy and the Jordan was at
hand. Naaman went and washed and was
cleansed. Our opponents, like Naaman, cry out:
<q>Why should you go to a Priest, a sinner like yourself,
when secretly, in your own room, you can approach
God, the pure fountain of grace, to be
washed from your sins?</q> I answer, because
Jesus Christ, a prophet, and more than a prophet,
has commanded you to do so.
</p>

<p>
The last charge that I will notice is the most
serious and the most offensive. We are told that
<pb n="362"/><anchor id="Pg362"/>
private confession is lawless; that the conscience
soon becomes <q>enfeebled and chained and starved</q>
by it, and, worse and worse, that sins are more
readily committed, if followed by an absolution
conveying pardon&mdash;in other words, that the more
attached Catholics are to the practice of their holy
religion the more depraved and corrupt they become.
Or, if they remain faithful to God, this
is not by reason of, but in spite of, their religious
exercises.
</p>

<p>
Surely, this was not the sentiment of the late
Dr. Ives, once Protestant Bishop of North Carolina,
and of many other illustrious converts, who,
from the day of their conversion to the hour of
their death never failed to receive consolation and
strength from the sacred tribunal.
</p>

<p>
Nor is it the sentiment of Rev. Father Lyman,
a Catholic Priest, of Baltimore, and brother of the
assistant Protestant Bishop of North Carolina,
nor of the present Archbishops of Baltimore and
Philadelphia, of the Bishops of Wilmington, Cleveland,
Columbus and Ogdensburg, and a host of
others, both of the Protestant clergy and laity, who
within the last fifty years have entered the Catholic
Church.
</p>

<p>
If we compare the Protestant and Catholic systems
for the forgiveness of sins, the Catholic system
will not suffer by the comparison. According
to the Protestant system, repentance is necessary
and sufficient for justification. The Catholic
system also requires repentance on the part of the
sinner as an indispensable prerequisite for the forgiveness
of sin. But it requires much more than
this. Before the penitent receives absolution he
must carefully examine his conscience and confess
his sins, according to their number and kind. He
is obliged to have a firm purpose of amendment, to
<pb n="363"/><anchor id="Pg363"/>
promise restitution, if he has defrauded his neighbor,
to repair any injury done his neighbor's
character, to be reconciled with his enemies and to
avoid the occasions of sin. Do not these obligations
afford a better safeguard against a relapse
into sin than a simple internal act of contrition?
</p>

<p>
Many most eminent Protestant, and even infidel
writers, who were conversant with the practical
workings of the confessional in the countries in
which they lived, bear testimony to the moral
reformation produced by it. The famous German
philosopher, Leibnitz, admits that it is a great
benefit conferred on men by God that He left in
His Church the power of forgiving sins.<note place='foot'>Systema Theol.</note>
</p>

<p>
Voltaire, certainly no friend of Christianity,
avows <q>that there is not perhaps a more useful
institution than confession.</q><note place='foot'>Remarques sur l'Olympe.</note>
</p>

<p>
Rousseau, not less hostile to the Church, exclaims:
<q>How many restitutions and reparations
does not confession cause among Catholics!</q><note place='foot'>Emile.</note>
</p>

<p>
The Protestant authorities of Nuremberg, in
Germany, shortly after the establishment of the
reformed doctrines in that city, were so much
alarmed at the laxity of morals which succeeded
after the abolition of confession that they petitioned
their Emperor, Charles V., to have it restored.
</p>

<p>
It is a favorite custom for the adversaries of
the Catholic Church to refer to the alleged loose
morals prevailing in France and in other Catholic
countries as a proof of the inferior standard of
Catholic morality. This is a safe, and at the same
time not the most honorable, mode of attack, as
the people of those nations are too far off to defend
themselves. For my part, I have spent
<pb n="364"/><anchor id="Pg364"/>
a considerable time in various portions of France,
and more edifying Christians I have never witnessed
than those I met in that country. For six
years I had for my professors French Priests,
whose exemplary lives were a daily sermon to all
around them.
</p>

<p>
I submit that the cosmopolitan city of Paris
(waiving, for the present, the enormities of which
it is accused), is not to be adduced as a fair criterion
of French morality. Let us stay at home
and judge of Catholic morals by the examples
furnished under our eyes.
</p>

<p>
The influence of the confessional has been fairly
tested in this country since the foundation of our
Republic. Are practical Catholics enfeebled in
conscience? Is their conscience chained and
starved? Has the absolution they received whetted
their appetites for more sin? Are they monsters
of immorality? I think that an enlightened
Protestant public will pronounce a contrary verdict.
</p>

<p>
I feel that I can say, with truth, that Catholics
who frequent the confessional are generally
virtuous in their private lives, just and honorable
in their dealings with others, and that they cultivate
charity and good-will toward their fellow-citizens.
</p>

<p>
It will not do to reply that it is the system, not
the individual, that is attacked. How can we
judge of a system unless by its practical working
in the individual? <q>By their fruits ye shall know
them,</q> says our Redeemer.
</p>

<p>
Vices, indeed, we have to deplore among certain
classes of our people, which are often superinduced
by their migratory habits and irregular
mode of life. But they are commonly sins of
frailty, and these are not the persons that are accustomed
<pb n="365"/><anchor id="Pg365"/>
to approach the confessional. If they
did their lives would be very different from what
they are.
</p>

<p>
The best of us, alas! are not what we ought to
be, considering the graces we receive. But if you
seek for canting hypocrites, or colossal defaulters,
or perpetrators of well-laid schemes of forgery, or
of systematic licentiousness, or of premeditated
violence, you will seek for such in vain among
those who frequent the confessional.
</p>

<p>
There is another objection which it is difficult to
kill. It dies hard and, like Banquo's ghost, it will
not down. If you drive it from the city, it will fly
to the town. If you expel it from the town, it will
take refuge in the village. If you eject it from the
village, it will hide itself like some noxious animal,
in some desert place until it makes its rounds again.
</p>

<p>
I allude to the charge that a price has to be paid
for remitting sins. <q>You have only (say these
slanderers) to pay a certain toll at the confessional
gate, and you can pass the biggest load of sin.</q>
</p>

<p>
It is hard to treat these objections seriously. I
have been hearing confessions for fifty years, and
of all who have come to me, not one has had the
sense of duty to offer me any compensation for absolving
them, and this is true of every Priest with
whom I have been acquainted. The truth is, the
Priest who would solicit a fee for absolution knows
that he would be guilty of simony, and would be
liable to suspension.
</p>

<p>
But we are told that confession is an intolerable
yoke, that it makes its votaries the slaves of the
Priests.
</p>

<p>
Before answering this objection, let me call your
attention to the inconsistency of our adversaries,
who blow hot and cold in the same breath. They
denounce confession as being too hard a remedy
for sin and condemn it, at the same time, as being
<pb n="366"/><anchor id="Pg366"/>
a smooth road to heaven. In one sentence they
style it a bed of roses; in the next a bed of thorns.
</p>

<p>
In a preceding objection it was charged that the
votaries of confession had no moral constraint at
all. Now it is said that their conscience is bound
in chains of slavery. Surely, confession cannot be
hard and easy at the same time.
</p>

<p>
I have already refuted, I trust, the former
charge. I shall now answer the second. I am not
aware in what sense our people are less independent
than those of any other class of the community.
The only restraint, as far as I know, imposed
on Catholics by their Priests is the yoke of
the Gospel, and to this restraint no Christian
ought to object. In my estimation, no body of
Christians enjoys more Apostolic freedom than
those of the Catholic communion, because they are
guided in their conduct, not by the ever-changing
<hi rend='italic'>ipse dixit</hi> of any minister, but by the unchangeable
teachings of the Church of Jesus Christ.
</p>

<p>
But if to love their Priest, to reverence his
sacred character, to obey his voice as the voice of
God; if to be willing to make any sacrifice for their
spiritual father; if, I say, you call this slavery,
then our Catholic people are slaves, indeed, and,
what is more, they are content with their chains.
</p>

<p>
Even our Manuals of Devotion have not escaped
the lash of wanton criticism. They have excited
the pious horror of some modern Pharisees because
they contain a table of sins for the use of
those preparing for confession. The same flower
that furnishes honey to the bee supplies poison to
the wasp; and, in like manner, the same book that
gives only the honey of consolation to the devout
reader has nothing but moral poison for those that
search its pages for nothing else.
</p>

<pb n="367"/><anchor id="Pg367"/>

<p>
How can anyone object to the table of sins in
our prayer-books and consistently advocate the
circulation of the Bible, which contains incomparably
plainer and more palpable allusions to
gross crimes than are found in our books of devotion?
Let us not forget the adage, <q><hi rend='italic'>Honi soit
qui mal y pense.</hi></q>
</p>

<p>
I may be permitted, in concluding this subject,
to add the testimony of my own experience on the
beneficent influence of the confessional; for, like
my brethren in the ministry, I am, in the language
of Dryden,
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l><q rend='pre'>One bred apart from worldly noise,</q></l>
<l><q rend='post'>To study souls, their cures, and their diseases.</q></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
Since the time of my ordination up to the present
hour I have been accustomed to hear confessions
almost every day. I have, therefore, had a
fair opportunity of ascertaining the value of the
<q>system.</q> The impressions forced upon my
mind, far from being peculiar to myself, are shared
by every Catholic Priest throughout the world
charged with the care of souls. The testimony of
ten experienced confessors ought, in my estimation,
to have more weight in enabling men to
judge of the moral tendencies of the confessional
than the gratuitous assertions of a thousand individuals
who have no personal experience of it,
but who draw on their heated imaginations or on
the pages of sensational novels for the statements
they offer.
</p>

<p>
My experience is that the confessional is the
most powerful lever ever erected by a merciful
God for raising men from the mire of sin. It has
more weight in withdrawing people from vice than
even the pulpit. In public sermons we scatter the
<pb n="368"/><anchor id="Pg368"/>
seed of the Word of God; in the confessional we
reap the harvest. In sermons, to use a military
phrase, the fire is at random, but in confession it
is a dead shot. The words of the Priest go home
to the heart of the penitent. In a public discourse
the Priest addresses all in general, and his words
of admonition may be applicable to very few of
his hearers. But his words spoken in the confessional
are directed exclusively to the penitent,
whose heart is open to receive the Word of God.
The confessor exhorts the penitent according to his
spiritual wants. He cautions him against the frequentation
of dangerous company and other occasions
of sin, or he recommends special practices of
piety suited to the penitent's wants.
</p>

<p>
Hence missionaries are accustomed to estimate
the fruit of a mission more by the number of penitents
who have approached the sacred tribunal
than by the number of persons who have listened
to their sermons.
</p>

<p>
Of all the labors that our sacred ministry imposes
on us, there is none more arduous or more
irksome than that of hearing confessions. If I may
make a revelation of my own life, I deferred receiving
Holy Orders for two years, from a sense of
the dread responsibility connected with the confessional.
It is no trifling task to sit for six or eight
consecutive hours on a hot summer day, listening
to stories of sin and sorrow and misery. It is only
the consciousness of the immense good he is doing
that sustains the confessor in the sacred tribunal.
He is one <q>who can have compassion on the ignorant
and erring, because he himself is also encompassed
with infirmity.</q><note place='foot'>Heb. v. 2.</note>
</p>

<p>
I have seen the man whose conscience was
weighed down by the accumulated sins of twenty
<pb n="369"/><anchor id="Pg369"/>
winters. Upon his face were branded guilt and
shame, remorse and confusion. There he stood by
the confessional, with downcast countenance,
ashamed, like the Publican, to look up to heaven.
He glided into the little mercy-seat. No human
ear will ever learn what there transpired. The
revelations of the confessional are a sealed book.
</p>

<p>
But during the brief time spent in the confessional
a resurrection occurred more miraculous
than the raising of Lazarus from the tomb&mdash;it was
the resurrection from the grave of sin of a soul
that had long lain worm-eaten. During those
precious moments a ray from heaven dispelled the
darkness and gloom from that self-accuser's mind.
The genial warmth of the Holy Spirit melted his
frozen heart, and the purifying influence of the
same Spirit that came on the Apostles, <q>like a
mighty wind from heaven,</q> scattered the poisonous
atmosphere in which he lived and filled his soul
with Divine grace. When he came out there was
quickness in his step, joy on his countenance, a
new light in his eye. Had you asked him why, he
would have answered: <q>Because I was lost, and
am found. Having been dead, I am come to life
again.</q><note place='foot'>Luke xv. 32.</note>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head>II. On The Relative Morality Of Catholic And Protestant
Countries.</head>

<p>
It has been gravely asserted that the confession
of sin and the doctrine of absolution tend to the
spread of crime and immorality. Statistics are
produced to show that murder and illegitimate
<pb n="370"/><anchor id="Pg370"/>
births are largely in excess in countries under
Catholic influence, and that this prevalence of
wickedness is the <emph>result of confession and easy
absolution</emph>.
</p>

<p>
If our system of absolving those only who both
repent and <emph>confess</emph> leads to laxity of morals, how
much more must the Protestant system, which
omits that which is most humiliating and admits
the sinner to reconciliation on condition of mere
interior dispositions? As all our catechisms teach,
and as every Catholic knows, there is no pardon
of sin without sorrow of heart and purpose of
amendment. It is a great mistake to suppose that
the most ignorant Catholic believes he can procure
the pardon of his sins by simply confessing them
without being truly sorry for them. The estimate
which so many Protestants set on the virtue of
even the lower classes of Roman Catholics is
clearly enough evinced in the preference which
they constantly manifest in their employment of
Catholics&mdash;practical Catholics&mdash;Catholics who go
to confession. I maintain, therefore, that confession,
far from being an incentive to sin, as our adversaries
have the hardihood to affirm, is a most
powerful check on the depravity of men and a
most effectual preventive of their criminal excesses.
</p>

<p>
But is it true that crimes, especially murder and
illegitimacy, are more prevalent in Catholic than
in Protestant countries? I utterly deny the assertion,
and also appeal to statistics in support of the
denial. Whence do our opponents derive their information?
Forsooth, from Rev. M. Hobart Seymour's
<q>Nights Among Romanists</q> and similar
absolutely unreliable compilations, the false statements
of which have been again and again refuted.
</p>

<pb n="371"/><anchor id="Pg371"/>

<p>
Rev. Mr. Seymour gives the following list of the
number of murders in England, France and Ireland:
</p>

<p>
Ireland: 19 homicides to the million of inhabitants<lb/>
France: 31<lb/>
England: 4
</p>

<p>
The reader of the above might well draw back in
astonishment and exclaim, <q>Truly moral atmosphere
of England!</q> But how do these statements
compare with the official records which I submit to
the unprejudiced reader? Recent returns from
the <q>Hand-Book</q> for France, and <q>Thom's Official
Directory for England and Ireland, 1869,</q> are
as follows:
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{2cm} p{2cm} p{2cm}'; tblcolumns: 'l r r'">
<row><cell></cell><cell>Convictions (and sentences to death).</cell>
     <cell>Executions.</cell></row>
<row><cell>1864.--France</cell><cell>9</cell><cell>5</cell></row>
<row><cell>1867.--England and Wales</cell><cell>27</cell><cell>10</cell></row>
<row><cell>Ireland</cell><cell>3</cell><cell>0</cell></row>
</table>

<p>
These figures, which are from authenticated
sources, do not bear out our accusers in their assertion
that murders are more prevalent in Catholic
than in Protestant countries. The statistics of
this crime are limited, or they are not in very general
circulation. But we have more extensive information
in reference to the other great crime
which, it is charged, prevails to a much more
alarming extent in countries under Catholic influence,
viz., illegitimacy. Here again we shall
meet statistics with counter-statistics to refute unjust
declarations. We do not wish to be understood
as advocating the immaculateness of Catholic
communities. We frankly admit and heartily
deplore the disorders which Catholics commit, but
we deny that they are worse than their Protestant
neighbors; and still more emphatically do we deny
<pb n="372"/><anchor id="Pg372"/>
that the Church is responsible for their disorders.
</p>

<p>
The Journal of the Statistical Society of London,
of the years 1860, '62, '65, '67, gives the number
of illegitimate births in England and Wales as
6-1/2 in every hundred, whilst in the Catholic kingdom
of Sardinia the number is slightly over two in
the hundred, and in Ireland three in every hundred.
If the test of illegitimacy is a correct index
of the morality of a country, how refreshing to
pass from Protestant England across to Catholic
Ireland or to the Continent and visit Sardinia!
The moral atmosphere of these countries, compared
with England, must be as a healthful breeze
to a pestilential marsh.
</p>

<p>
That we may see at a glance the real condition
of European countries in reference to this species
of crime, I will here insert as correct a table as can
be made from the latest reports. (Vid. <hi rend='italic'>Catholic
World</hi>, Vol. XI., p. 112.)
</p>

<p>
Percentage Of Illegitimacy In Protestant And
Catholic Countries Of Europe.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{2cm} p{2cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(40) r'">
<row><cell>Protestant.</cell><cell>Per cent.</cell></row>
<row><cell>Holland</cell><cell>4.0</cell></row>
<row><cell>Switzerland</cell><cell>5.5</cell></row>
<row><cell>Prussia (Protestant)</cell><cell>10.0</cell></row>
<row><cell>England and Wales</cell><cell>6.5</cell></row>
<row><cell>Sweden and Norway</cell><cell>9.6</cell></row>
<row><cell>Scotland</cell><cell>10.1</cell></row>
<row><cell>Denmark</cell><cell>11.0</cell></row>
<row><cell>German States</cell><cell>14.8</cell></row>
<row><cell>Wurtemburg</cell><cell>16.4</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>Catholic.</cell><cell></cell></row>
<row><cell>Italy</cell><cell>5.1</cell></row>
<row><cell>Spain</cell><cell>5.5</cell></row>
<row><cell>France</cell><cell>7.2</cell></row>
<row><cell>Prussia (Catholic)</cell><cell>6.5</cell></row>
<row><cell>Belgium</cell><cell>7.2</cell></row>
<row><cell>Austria</cell><cell>11.1</cell></row>
<row><cell>Ireland</cell><cell>3.0</cell></row>
</table>

<pb n="373"/><anchor id="Pg373"/>

<p>
We have divided Prussia into Protestant and
Catholic because statistics are kept according to
the religious creed of the people; and we discover
that, whilst among the Catholic portion of the empire
there is but a percentage of six and a half of
illegitimate births, among the Protestants it runs
up to ten per cent. And the same remark is applicable
to Ireland.
</p>

<p>
The <hi rend='italic'>Scotman</hi>, whose statements are based on the
report of the British Registrar-General, publishes
the following statistics:
</p>

<p>
<q>The proportion of illegitimate births to the
total number of births is in Ireland 3.8 per cent.;
in England the proportion is 6.4; in Scotland 9.9;
in other words, England is nearly twice, and Scotland
nearly thrice worse, than Ireland. Something
worse has to be added, from which no consolation
can be derived. The proportion of illegitimacy
is very unequally distributed over Ireland,
and the inequality rather humbling to us as Protestants,
and still more as Presbyterians and
Scotchmen. Taking Ireland according to the
registration divisions, the proportion of illegitimate
births varies from 6.2 to 1.3. The division
showing this lowest figure is the western, being
substantially the Province of Connaught, where
about nineteen-twentieths of the population are
Celtic and Roman Catholic. The division showing
the highest proportion of illegitimacy is the north-eastern,
which comprises, or almost consists of,
the Province of Ulster, where the population is almost
equally divided between Protestants and Roman
Catholics, and where the great majority of
Protestants are of Scotch blood and of the Presbyterian
church. The sum of the whole matter is,
that semi-Presbyterian and semi-Scotch Ulster is
fully three times more immoral than wholly Popish
<pb n="374"/><anchor id="Pg374"/>
and wholly Irish Connaught&mdash;which corresponds
with wonderful accuracy to the more general
fact that Scotland, as a whole, is three times
more immoral than Ireland as a whole.</q>
</p>

<p>
It is worthy, too, of notice, that in the tabular
statement above presented the percentage of illegitimacy
in Holland and Switzerland, where
there are large Catholic minorities, is lower than
in any other Protestant country.
</p>

<p>
We have at hand evidences, furnished by Protestant
writers, of the hideous immoralities of certain
European nations that are more thoroughly
Protestantized than England itself. Thus, Mr.
Laing writes: <q>Of the 2,714 children born in
Stockholm, 1,577 were legitimate, 1,137 illegitimate;
making only a balance of 440 chaste mothers
out of 2,714; and the proportion of illegitimate to
legitimate children not as one to two and three-tenths,
but as one to one and a half.</q>&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>A Tour in
Sweden in</hi> 1838.
</p>

<p>
But we are not disposed to parade these monstrous
vices, no matter by whom committed. We
allude to them with feelings of shame, not of pleasure;
and give them a passing notice merely in
self-defence against the gratuitous assertions of
our adversaries. We certainly do not wish to excuse
or palliate the evil deeds of Catholics, who,
with all the blessed aids which their religion affords,
ought to be much better than they are. Yet
we will add, quoting the words of the <hi rend='italic'>Catholic
World</hi>: <q>If we are not very much better than our
neighbors, we are not any worse; and are not to be
hounded down with the cry of vice and immorality
by a set of Pharisees who are constantly lauding
their own superiority and thanking God they are
so much better than we poor Catholics.</q>
</p>

</div>

</div>

<pb n="375"/><anchor id="Pg375"/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc' level1='Chapter XXVII. Indulgences.'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='Chapter XXVII.'/>
<head type='sub'>Chapter XXVII.</head>
<head>Indulgences.</head>

<p>
There are few tenets of the Catholic Church
so little understood, or so grossly misrepresented
by her adversaries, as her doctrine
regarding Indulgences.
</p>

<p>
One of the reasons of the popular misapprehension
of an Indulgence may be ascribed to the
change which the meaning of that term has gradually
undergone. The word Indulgence originally
signified <hi rend='italic'>favor, remission or forgiveness</hi>. Now,
it is commonly used in the sense of unlawful gratification,
and of free scope to the passions. Hence,
when some ignorant or prejudiced persons hear of
the Church granting an Indulgence the idea of
license to sin is at once presented to their minds.
</p>

<p>
An Indulgence is simply a remission in whole or
in part, through the superabundant merits of
Jesus Christ and His saints, of the temporal
punishment due to God on account of sin after the
guilt and eternal punishment have been remitted.
</p>

<p>
It should be borne in mind that, even after our
guilt is removed, there often remains some temporal
punishment to be undergone, either in this
life or the next, as an expiation to Divine sanctity
and justice. The Holy Scripture furnishes us
with many examples of this truth. Mary, the sister
of Moses, was pardoned the sin which she had
committed by murmuring against her brother.
<pb n="376"/><anchor id="Pg376"/>
Nevertheless, God inflicted on her the penalty of
leprosy and of seven days' separation from the
people.<note place='foot'>Num. xii.</note>
</p>

<p>
Nathan, the prophet, announced to David that
his crimes were forgiven, but that he should suffer
many chastisements from the hand of God.<note place='foot'>II. Kings xii.</note>
</p>

<p>
That our Lord has given to the Church the
power of granting Indulgences is clearly deduced
from the Sacred Text. To the Prince of the Apostles
He said: <q>Whatsoever thou shalt bind on
earth shall be bound also in heaven; and whatsoever
thou shalt loose on earth shall be loosed also
in heaven.</q><note place='foot'>Matt. xvi.
19.</note> And to all the Apostles assembled
together He made the same solemn declaration.<note place='foot'>Ibid., xviii. 18.</note>
By these words our Savior empowered His
Church to deliver her children (if properly disposed)
from every obstacle that might retard them
from the Kingdom of Heaven. Now there are two
impediments that withhold a man from the
heavenly kingdom&mdash;sin and the temporal punishment
incurred by it. And the Church having
power to remit the greater obstacle, which is sin,
has power also to remove the smaller obstacle,
which is the temporal punishment due on account
of it.
</p>

<p>
The prerogative of granting Indulgence has
been exercised by the teachers of the Church from
the beginning of her existence.
</p>

<p>
St. Paul exercised it in behalf of the incestuous
Corinthian whom he had condemned to a severe
penance proportioned to his guilt, <q>that his spirit
might be saved in the day of the Lord.</q><note place='foot'>I. Cor. v. 5.</note> And
having learned afterwards of the Corinthian's
fervent contrition the Apostle absolves him from
the penance which he had imposed: <q>To him, that
<pb n="377"/><anchor id="Pg377"/>
is such a one, this rebuke is sufficient, which is
given by many. So that contrariwise you should
rather pardon and comfort him, lest, perhaps, such
a one be swallowed up with over-much sorrow....
And to whom you have pardoned anything,
I also. For, what I have pardoned, if I have pardoned
anything, for your sakes I have done it in
the person of Christ.</q><note place='foot'>II. Cor. ii. 6-10.</note>
</p>

<p>
Here we have all the elements that constitute an
Indulgence. First&mdash;A penance, or temporal
punishment proportioned to the gravity of the offence,
is imposed on the transgressor. Second&mdash;The
penitent is truly contrite for his crime. Third&mdash;This
determines the Apostle to remit the
penalty. Fourth&mdash;The Apostle considers the
relaxation of the penance ratified by Jesus Christ,
in whose name it is imparted.
</p>

<p>
We find the Bishops of the Church, after the
Apostle, wielding this same power. No one disputes
the right, which they claimed from the very
first ages, of inflicting canonical penances on
grievous criminals, who were subjected to long
fasts, severe abstinences and other mortifications
for a period extending from a few days to five or
ten years and even to a lifetime, according to the
gravity of the offence. These penalties were, in
several instances, mitigated or cancelled by the
Church, according to her discretion; for a society
that can inflict a punishment can also remit it.
Our Lord gave His Church power not only to bind,
but also to loose. This discretionary prerogative
was often exercised by the Church at the intercession
of those who were condemned to martyrdom,
when the penitents themselves gave strong marks
of fervent sorrow, as we learn from the writings
of Tertullian and Cyprian.
</p>

<pb n="378"/><anchor id="Pg378"/>

<p>
The General Council of Nice and other Synods
authorize Bishops to mitigate, or even to remit
altogether, public penances, whenever, in their
judgment, the penitent manifested special marks
of repentance. Now, in relaxing the canonical penances,
or in substituting for them a milder satisfaction,
the Bishops granted what we call an Indulgence.
This sentence of remission on the part
of the Bishops was valid not only in the sight of
the Church, but also in the sight of God. Although
the Church imposes canonical penances no
longer, God has never ceased to inflict temporal
punishment for sin. Hence Indulgences continue
to be necessary now, if not as substitute for canonical
penances, at least as a mild and merciful
payment of the temporal debt due to God.
</p>

<p>
An Indulgence is called plenary or partial, according
as it remits the whole or a part of the
temporal punishment due to sin. An Indulgence,
for instance, of forty days remits, before God, so
much of the temporal punishment as would have
been expiated in the primitive Church by a canonical
penance of forty days.
</p>

<p>
Although the very name of Indulgence is now
so repugnant to our dissenting brethren, there was
a time when the Protestant Church professed to
grant them. In the canons of the Church of England
reference is made to Indulgences, and to the
disposition to be made of the money paid for
them.<note place='foot'>Articuli pro Clero, <hi rend='smallcaps'>A.D.</hi>
1584. Sparrow, 194. I admit, indeed,
that Protestant canons have but a fleeting and ephemeral
authority even among themselves, and that the canons must
yield to the spirit of the times, not the times to the canons. I
dare say that even few Protestant theologians are familiar with
the canons to which I have referred. Some people have a convenient
faculty of forgetting unpleasant traditions.</note>
</p>

<p>
From what I have said you may judge for yourself
<pb n="379"/><anchor id="Pg379"/>
what to think of those who say that an Indulgence
is the remission of past sins, or a license
to commit sin granted by the Pope as a spiritual
compensation to the faithful for pecuniary offerings
made him. I need not inform you that an
Indulgence is neither the one nor the other. It is
not a remission of sin, since no one can gain an
Indulgence until he is already free from sin. It
is still less a license to commit sin; for every
Catholic child knows that neither Priest nor
Bishop nor Pope nor even God Himself&mdash;with all
reverence be it said&mdash;can give license to commit
the smallest fault.
</p>

<p>
But are not Indulgences at variance with the
spirit of the Gospel, since they appear to be a mild
and feeble substitute for alms-giving, fasts,
abstinences and other penitential austerities,
which Jesus Christ inculcated and practised, and
which the primitive Church enforced?
</p>

<p>
The Church, as every one must know who is acquainted
with her history, never exempts her children
from the obligation of doing works of penance.
</p>

<p>
No one can deny that the practices of mortification
are more frequent among Catholics than
among Protestants. Where will you find the
evangelical duty of fasting enforced, if not from
the Catholic pulpit? It is well known that, among
the members of the Catholic Church, those who
avail themselves of the boon of Indulgences are
usually her most practical, edifying and fervent
children. Their spiritual growth far from being
retarded, is quickened by the aid of Indulgences,
which are usually accompanied by acts of contrition,
devotion, self-denial and the reception of the
Sacraments.
</p>

<p>
But, do what we will, we cannot please our opponents.
<pb n="380"/><anchor id="Pg380"/>
If we fast and give alms; if we crucify
our flesh, and make pilgrimages and perform other
works of penance, we are accused of clinging to the
rags of dead works, instead of "holding on to
Jesus" by faith. If, on the other hand, we enrich
our souls with the treasures of Indulgences we are
charged with relying on the vicarious merits of
others and of lightening too much the salutary
burden of the cross. But how can Protestants
consistently find fault with the Church for <emph>mitigating</emph>
the austerities of penance, since their own
fundamental principle rests on <emph>faith alone without
good works</emph>?
</p>

<p>
But have not Indulgences been the occasion of
many abuses at various times, particularly in the
sixteenth century?
</p>

<p>
I will not deny that Indulgences have been
abused; but are not the most sacred things liable
to be perverted? This is a proper place to refer
briefly to the Bull of Pope Leo X. proclaiming the
Indulgence which afforded Luther a pretext for
his apostasy. Leo determined to bring to completion
the magnificent Church of St. Peter, commenced
by his predecessor, Julius II. With that
view he issued a Bull promulgating an Indulgence
to such as would contribute some voluntary offering
toward the erection of the grand cathedral.
Those, however, who contributed nothing shared
equally in the treasury of the Church, provided
they complied with the essential conditions for
gaining the Indulgence. The only indispensable
conditions enjoined by the Papal Bull were sincere
repentance and confession of sins. D'Aubigne
admits this truth, though in a faltering manner,
when he observes that <q>in the Pope's Bull
something was said of the repentance of the heart
<pb n="381"/><anchor id="Pg381"/>
and the confession of the lips.</q><note place='foot'>Vol.
I. p. 214.</note> The applicants
for the Indulgence knew well that, no matter how
munificent were their offerings, these would avail
them nothing without true contrition of heart.
</p>

<p>
No traffic or sale of Indulgences was, consequently,
authorized or countenanced by the Head
of the Church, since the contributions were understood
to be voluntary. In order to check any
sordid love of gain in those charged with preaching
the Indulgence, <q>the hand that delivered the
Indulgence,</q> as D'Aubigne testifies, <q>could not
receive the money: that was forbidden under the
severest penalties.</q><note place='foot'>Ibid.</note>
</p>

<p>
Wherein, then, was the conduct of the Pope reprehensible?
Certainly not in soliciting the donations
of the faithful for the purpose of erecting a
temple of worship, a temple which today stands
unrivalled in majesty and beauty!
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l><q rend='pre'>But thou of temples old, or altars new,</q></l>
<l>Standest alone, with nothing like to thee;</l>
<l>Worthiest of God, the holy and the true,</l>
<l>Since Sion's desolation, when that He</l>
<l>Forsook His former city, what could be</l>
<l>Of earthly structures, in His honor piled,</l>
<l>Of a sublimer aspect? Majesty,</l>
<l>Power, Glory, Strength, and Beauty, all are aisled</l>
<l><q rend='post'>In this eternal ark of worship
undefiled.</q><note place='foot'>Byron.</note></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
If Moses was justified in appealing to the
Hebrew people, in the Old Law, for offerings to
adorn the tabernacle, why should not the Pope be
equally justified in appealing for similar offerings
to the Christian people, among whom he exercises
supreme authority, as Moses did among the Israelites?
</p>

<p>
Nor did the Pope exceed his legitimate powers
in promising to the pious donors spiritual favors
<pb n="382"/><anchor id="Pg382"/>
in exchange for their donations. For if our sins
can be redeemed by alms to the poor,<note place='foot'>Daniel
iv. 24.</note> as the Scripture
tells us, why not as well by offerings in the
cause of religion? When Protestant ministers appeal
to their congregations in behalf of themselves
and their children, or in support of a church, they
do not fail to hold out to their hearers spiritual
blessings in reward for their gifts. It is not long
since a Methodist parson of New York addressed
these sacred words to Cornelius Vanderbilt, the
millionaire, who had endowed a Methodist college:
<q>Cornelius, thy prayer is heard, and thy
alms are had in remembrance in the sight of
God.</q><note place='foot'>Acts x.
31.</note> The minister is more <emph>indulgent</emph> than even
the Pope, to whom were given the keys of the
Kingdom of Heaven; for the minister declares
Cornelius absolved without the preliminary of
confession or contrition, while even, according to
D'Aubigne, the inflexible Pope insisted on the
necessity of <q>repentance of the heart and confession
of the lips</q> before the donor's offering could
avail him to salvation.
</p>

<p>
John Tetzel, a Dominican monk, who had been
appointed the chief preacher to announce the Indulgence
in Germany, was accused by Luther of
exceeding his powers by making them subservient
to his own private ends. Tetzel's conduct was
disavowed and condemned by the representative of
the Holy See. The Council of Trent, held some
time after, took effectual measures to put a stop
to all irregularities regarding Indulgences and issued
the following decree: <q>Wishing to correct
and amend the abuses which have crept into them,
and on occasion of which this signal name of Indulgences
is blasphemed by heretics, the Holy
Synod enjoins in general, by the present decree,
<pb n="383"/><anchor id="Pg383"/>
that all wicked traffic for obtaining them, which
has been the fruitful source of many abuses among
the Christian people, should be wholly abolished.</q><note place='foot'>Sess.
xxv. Dec. de Indulgentia.</note>
</p>

</div>

<pb n="384"/><anchor id="Pg384"/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc' level1='Chapter XXVIII. Extreme Unction.'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='Chapter XXVIII.'/>
<head type='sub'>Chapter XXVIII.</head>
<head>Extreme Unction.</head>

<p>
Extreme Unction is a Sacrament in which
the sick, by the anointing with holy oil and
the prayers of the Priests, receive spiritual
succor and even corporal strength when such is
conducive to their salvation. This unction is
called <hi rend='italic'>Extreme</hi>, because it is usually the last of
the holy unctions administered by the Church.
</p>

<p>
The Apostle St. James clearly refers to this
Sacrament and points out its efficacy in the following
words: <q>Is any man sick among you; let
him bring in the Priests of the Church, and let
them pray over him, anointing him with oil in the
name of the Lord, and the prayer of faith shall
save the sick man; and the Lord shall raise him
up; and if he be in sins, they shall be forgiven
him.</q><note place='foot'>James v. 14, 15.</note>
</p>

<p>
Several of the ancient Fathers allude to this
Sacrament. Origen (third century) writes:
<q>There is also a remission of sins through penitence,
when the sinner ... is not ashamed to declare
his sin to the Priest of the Lord, and to seek
a remedy ... wherein that also is fulfilled which
the Apostle James saith: <q><emph>But if any be sick
among you, let him call in the Priests of the
Church, and let them impose hands on him, anointing
him with oil in the name of the Lord</emph>.</q></q><note place='foot'>Homil.
ii. in Levit.</note>
</p>

<pb n="385"/><anchor id="Pg385"/>

<p>
St. Chrysostom (fourth century) says: <q>Not
only when they (the Priests) regenerate us, but
they have also power to forgive sins committed
afterward; for he says: <q>Is any man sick among
you; let him call in the Priests of the Church, and
let them pray over him, anointing him with oil in
the name of the Lord.</q></q><note place='foot'>Lib. iii. de Sacred.</note>
</p>

<p>
Pope Innocent I. (fifth century), in a letter to a
Bishop named Decentius, after quoting the words
of St. James, proceeds: <q>These words, there is no
doubt, ought to be understood of the faithful who
are sick, who can be anointed with the holy oil,
which, having been prepared by a Bishop, may be
used, not only for Priests, but for all Christians.</q><note place='foot'>Epist.
xxv. ad Decentum.</note>
</p>

<p>
The Sacramentary, or ancient Roman Ritual, revised
by Pope St. Gregory in the sixth century,
prescribes the blessing of oil by the Bishop, and
the prayers to be recited in the anointing of the
sick.
</p>

<p>
The venerable Bede of England, who lived in
the eighth century, referring to the words of St.
James, writes: <q>The custom of the Church requires
that the sick be anointed by the Priests with
consecrated oil and be sanctified by the prayer
which accompanies it.</q><note place='foot'>Comment in locum.</note>
</p>

<p>
The Greek Church, which separated from the
Roman Catholic Church in the ninth century, says
in its profession of faith: <q>The seventh Sacrament
is Extreme Unction, prescribed by Christ;
for, after He had begun to send His disciples two
and two (Mark vi. 7-13), they anointed and healed
many, which unction the Church has since maintained
by pious usage, as we learn from the
Epistle of St. James: <emph><q>Is any man sick among
you,</q> etc.</emph> The fruits proper to this Sacrament,
<pb n="386"/><anchor id="Pg386"/>
as St. James declares, are the remission of sins,
health of soul, strength&mdash;in fine, of body. But
though it does not always produce this last result,
it always, at least, restores the soul to a better
state by the forgiveness of sins.</q> This is precisely
the Catholic teaching on this subject. All
the other Oriental churches, some of which separated
from Rome in the fifth century, likewise enumerate
Extreme Unction among their Sacraments.
</p>

<p>
Such identity of doctrine proclaimed during so
many ages by churches so wide apart can have no
other than an Apostolic origin.
</p>

<p>
The eminent Protestant Leibnitz makes this
candid admission: <q>There is no room for much
discussion regarding the unction of the sick. It
is supported by the words of Scripture, the interpretation
of the Church, in which pious and Catholic
men safely confide. Nor do I see what any
one can find reprehensible in that practice which
the Church accepts.</q><note place='foot'>Systema Theol., p. 280.</note>
</p>

<p>
Protestants, though professing to be guided by
the Holy Scripture, entirely disregard the admonition
of St. James. Luther acted with more consistency.
Finding that the injunction of the Apostle
was too plain to be explained away by subtlety
of words, he boldly rejected the entire Epistle,
which he contemptuously styled <q>a letter of
straw.</q><note place='foot'>Lib. de Captiv. Babyl.</note>
</p>

<p>
It is sad to think that our separated brethren
discard this consoling instrument of grace, though
pressed upon them by an Apostle of Jesus Christ;
for, surely, a spiritual medicine which diminishes
the terrors of death, comforts the dying Christian,
fortifies the soul in its final struggle, and purifies
it for its passage from time to eternity, should be
gratefully and eagerly made use of, especially
when prescribed by an inspired Physician.
</p>

</div>

<pb n="387"/><anchor id="Pg387"/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc' level1='Chapter XXIX. The Priesthood.'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='Chapter XXIX.'/>
<head type='sub'>Chapter XXIX.</head>
<head>The Priesthood.</head>

<p>
The Apostles were clothed with the powers of
Jesus Christ. The Priest, as the successor
of the Apostles, is clothed with their power.
This fact reveals to us the eminent dignity of the
priestly character.
</p>

<p>
The exalted dignity of the Priest is derived not
from the personal merits for which he may be conspicuous,
but from the sublime functions which he
is charged to perform. To the carnal eye the
Priest looks like other men, but to the eye of faith
he is exalted above the angels, because he exercises
powers not given even to angels.
</p>

<p>
The Priest is the <hi rend='italic'>ambassador of God</hi>, appointed
to vindicate His honor and to proclaim His glory.
<q>We are ambassadors for Christ,</q> says the Apostle;
<q>God, as it were, exhorting by us.</q><note place='foot'>II.
Cor. v. 20.</note> If it is
esteemed a great privilege for a citizen of the
United States to represent our country in any of
the courts of Europe, how much greater is the
prerogative to represent the court of heaven
among the nations of the earth! <q>As the Father
hath sent Me,</q> says our Lord to His Apostles, <q>I
also send you.</q><note place='foot'>John xx.
21.</note> <q>Going, therefore, teach ye all
nations, ... teaching them to observe all things,
whatsoever I have commanded you. And, behold,
I am with you all days, even to the consummation
<pb n="388"/><anchor id="Pg388"/>
of the world.</q><note place='foot'>Matt. xxviii. 19,
20.</note> The jurisdiction of earthly representatives
is limited, but the authority of the
ministers of God extends over the whole earth.
<q>Go ye into the whole world and preach the Gospel,</q>
says Christ, <q>to every creature.</q><note place='foot'>Mark xvi. 15.</note>
</p>

<p>
Not only does Jesus empower His ministers to
preach in His name, but he commands their
hearers to listen and obey. <q>Whosoever will not
receive you, nor hear your words, going forth
from that house or city, shake off the dust from
your feet. Amen, I say to you, it shall be more
tolerable for the land of Sodom and Gomorrha in
the day of judgment than for that city.</q><note place='foot'>Matt.
x. 14, 15.</note> <q>He
that heareth you heareth Me; and he that
despiseth you despiseth Me; and he that despiseth
Me despiseth Him that sent Me.</q><note place='foot'>Luke x. 16.</note>
</p>

<p>
God requires not only that His Gospel should
be heard with reverence, but that the persons of
His Apostles should be honored. As no greater
insult can be offered to a nation than to insult its
representative at a foreign court, so no greater
injury can be offered to our Lord than to do violence
to His representatives, the Priests of His
Church. <q>Touch not My anointed, and do no evil
to My prophets.</q><note place='foot'>Paralip, xvi.
22.</note> God avenged the crime of two
and forty boys who mocked the prophet Eliseus
by sending wild beasts to tear them in pieces.
The frightful death of Maria Monk, the caluminator
of consecrated Priests and Virgins, who ended
her life a drunken maniac on Blackwell's Island,
proves that our religious institutions are not to be
mocked with impunity.
</p>

<p>
When an ambassador is accredited from this
country to a foreign court, he is honored with the
confidence of the President, from whom he receives
<pb n="389"/><anchor id="Pg389"/>
private instructions. So does Jesus honor His
ambassadors with His friendship and communicate
to them the secrets of heaven: <q>I will not
now call you servants; for, the servant knoweth
not what his Lord doeth. But I have called you
friends, because all things whatsoever I have
heard of My Father I have made known to you.</q><note place='foot'>John xv. 15.</note>
</p>

<p>
What a privilege to be the herald of God's law
to the nations of the earth! <q>How beautiful on the
mountains are the feet of him that bringeth good
tidings and that preacheth peace: of him that
showeth forth good, that preacheth salvation, that
saith to Sion: Thy God shall reign.</q><note place='foot'>Isaiah
lii. 7.</note> How cherished
a favor to be the bearer of the olive branch
of peace to a world deluged by sin; to be appointed
by Heaven to proclaim a Gospel which brings
glory to God, and peace to men; that Gospel which
strengthens the weak, converts the sinner, reconciles
enemies, consoles the afflicted heart and holds
out to all the hope of eternal salvation!
</p>

<p>
I have often reflected on a remark made to me by
Senator Bayard of Delaware: <q>You of the clergy,</q>
he said, <q>have a great advantage as public speakers
over us political men. You enjoy the confidence
of your hearers. You can speak as long as
you please, you can admonish and rebuke as much
as you please, without any fear of contradiction;
while we are constantly liable to interruption.</q>
</p>

<p>
O! what a tremendous power is wielded by the
Catholic preacher! Hundreds of souls are hanging
on his words; hundreds are sustained by him in
spiritual life, and leave the Church depending on
him whether they go forth fortified with the Bread
of life, or famished and disappointed. I can say of
every Priest what Simeon said of our Lord, <q>This
man is set for the fall and the resurrection of many
in Israel.</q>
</p>

<pb n="390"/><anchor id="Pg390"/>

<p>
Not only are Priests the ambassadors of God,
but they are also the <hi rend='italic'>dispensers of His graces</hi> and
the almoners of His mercy. <q>Let a man so regard
us,</q> says the Apostle, <q>as ministers of
Christ and dispensers of the mysteries of God.</q><note place='foot'>I.
Cor. iv. 1.</note>
</p>

<p>
How can he be called a dispenser of God's mysteries
whose labors are confined to preaching?
But he is truly a dispenser of Divine mysteries
who distributes to the faithful the Sacraments, the
mysterious symbols and efficient causes of grace.
</p>

<p>
As St. John Chrysostom observes, it was not to
angels or archangels, but to the Priests of the New
Law that Christ said: <q>Whatsoever you shall bind
on earth shall be bound also in heaven; and whatsoever
you shall loose on earth shall be loosed also
in heaven.</q> To them alone He gave the power to
forgive sins, saying: <q>Whose sins you shall forgive,
they are forgiven.</q> To them alone He gave
the power of consecrating His Body and Blood and
dispensing the same to the faithful. He has empowered
the Priests of the New Law to impart the
grace of regeneration in Baptism. He has assigned
to them the solemn duty of preparing the
dying Christian for his final journey to eternity:
<q>Is any man sick among you? Let him bring in
the priests of the Church, and let them pray over
him, anointing him with oil, in the name of the
Lord.</q><note place='foot'>James v. 14.</note>
</p>

<p>
As far as heaven is above earth, as eternity is
above time, and the soul is above the body, so far
are the prerogatives vested in God's ministers
higher than those of any earthly potentate. An
earthly prince can cast into prison or release
therefrom. But his power is over the body. He
cannot penetrate into the sanctuary of the soul;
<pb n="391"/><anchor id="Pg391"/>
whereas the minister of God can release the soul
from the prison of sin, and restore it to the liberty
of a child of God.
</p>

<p>
To sum up in a few brief sentences the titles of
a Catholic Priest:
</p>

<p>
He is a <emph>king</emph>, reigning not over unwilling subjects,
but over the hearts and affections of his
people.
</p>

<p>
His spiritual children pay him not only the tribute
of their money, but also the tribute of their
love which royalty can neither purchase nor exact.
</p>

<p>
He is a <emph>shepherd</emph>, because he leads his flock into
the delicious pastures of the Sacraments and shelters
them from the wolves that lie in wait for their
souls.
</p>

<p>
He is a <emph>father</emph>, because he breaks the bread of
life to his spiritual children, whom he has begotten
in Christ Jesus through the Gospel.<note place='foot'>I. Cor. iv. 15.</note>
</p>

<p>
He is a <emph>judge</emph>, whose office it is to pass sentence
of pardon on self-accusing criminals.
</p>

<p>
He is a <emph>physician</emph>, because he heals their souls
from the loathsome distempers of sin.
</p>

<p>
St. John, in his Apocalypse, represents the
Church under the figure of a city. <q>I saw the
holy city, the new Jerusalem, coming down from
heaven, from God, prepared as a bride adorned for
her husband.</q><note place='foot'>Apoc. xxi.
2.</note> Our Savior is the Architect and
Founder of this celestial city. The Apostles are
its foundation. The faithful are the living stones
of the edifice. The anointed ministers of the Lord
are the workmen chosen to adjust and polish these
stones, that they may reflect the beauty and glory
of the sun of justice that perpetually illumines
this city. The Priests are engaged in adorning the
interior of the heavenly Jerusalem by enriching,
with virtue, the precious souls entrusted to their
<pb n="392"/><anchor id="Pg392"/>
charge. <q>God gave some, indeed, Apostles, and
some Prophets, and others Evangelists, and others
Pastors and Doctors, for the perfecting of the
saints, for the work of the ministry, for the building
up of the body of Christ,</q><note place='foot'>Eph.
iv. 11, 12.</note> which is His
Church. What an honor is this to the Priest of
the New Law! Surely God <q>hath not done alike
to every nation, and His judgments He hath not
made manifest to them.</q><note place='foot'>Ps. cxlvii. 20.</note>
</p>

<p>
With how much more force may we apply to the
successors of the Apostles the words which God
spoke to the Priests of the Old Law: <q>Hear, ye
sons of Levi. Is it a small thing unto you, that
the God of Israel hath separated you from all the
people and joined you to Himself, that ye should
serve Him in the service of the tabernacle, and
should stand before the congregation of the people
and minister unto Him?</q>
</p>

<p>
Our Savior affectionately puts this question
three times to Peter: <q>Simon, lovest thou Me?</q>
And three times Peter answers Him, <q>Lord, Thou
knowest that I love Thee.</q> What proof of love,
then, does Jesus exact of Peter? Does He say: If
thou lovest Me, chastise thy body by fasting and
stripes, prophesy, work miracles, lay down thy
life for Me? No, but <q>feed My lambs,</q> <q>feed
My sheep.</q> This was to be the closest bond of
Peter's devotion to his Master, and of the Master's
affection for His disciple.
</p>

<p>
And our Lord declares that the reward of His
disciples would be commensurate with the dignity
of their ministry: <q>Behold,</q> says Peter, <q>we
have left all things and have followed Thee. What,
therefore, shall we have? And Jesus said to them,
Amen, I say to you that you who have followed
Me, in the regeneration, when the Son of man shall
<pb n="393"/><anchor id="Pg393"/>
sit on the seat of His majesty, you shall also sit
on twelve seats, judging the twelve tribes of
Israel.</q> And immediately after He adds that
the worthy successors of the Apostles shall share
in their felicity: <q>And every one that hath left
house, or brethren, or sisters, or father, or mother,
or wife, or children, or lands for my name's sake
shall receive a hundredfold and shall possess life
everlasting.</q><note place='foot'>Matt. xix. 27-29.</note>
</p>

<p>
I know that there are many in our days who
deny that Priests possess any spiritual power&mdash;as
if God could not communicate such power to
men. I understand why atheists and rationalists,
who reject all revelation, should deny all supernatural
authority to the ministers of God. But
that professing Christians who accept the testimony
of Scripture should share in this unbelief
passes my comprehension.
</p>

<p>
Has not the Almighty, in numberless instances
recorded in Holy Writ, made man the instrument
of His power? Did not Moses convert the rivers
of Egypt into blood? Did he not cause water to
issue from the barren rock? Did not the prophets
predict future events? Did not the sun stand still
in the heavens at the command of Josue? Did not
Eliseus, the prophet, raise the dead to life? Why
do we believe all these prodigies? Because the
Scriptures record them. Does not the same Word
of God declare that the Apostles received power
to confer the Holy Ghost by the imposition of
hands, to forgive sins, to consecrate the Body and
Blood of Christ, etc. Is not the New Testament as
worthy of belief as the Old? Has not Jesus Christ
solemnly promised to be always with the ministers
of His Church, <q>even to the consummation of the
world,</q> strengthening them to repeat those miracles
of mercy that were wrought by His first disciples?
<pb n="394"/><anchor id="Pg394"/>
Can the God of truth be unfaithful to
His promises? Is He not as strong and merciful
now as He was in days of the Prophets and Apostles,
and are not we as much in need of the Holy
Ghost as the primitive Christians were? If God
could make feeble men the ministers of His mercy
then, why not now?
</p>

<p>
But should a Priest consider himself greater
than other men because he exercises such authority?
Far from it. He ought to humble himself
beneath others when he reflects to what weak
hands God assigns power so tremendous. He
should remember what our Savior said to the seventy-two
disciples, who, returning with joy from
their first mission, cried out to Him: <q>Lord, even
the devils are subject to us in Thy name.</q> But
Jesus checked their vain-glory, saying: <q>I saw
Satan like lightning fall from heaven. Behold, I
have given you power ... but rejoice not in this,
that spirits are subject to you; but rejoice in this,
that your names are written in heaven.</q><note place='foot'>Luke x. 18, 20.</note> The
Priest does not forget that <q>the most severe
judgment shall be for them that bear rule,</q><note place='foot'>Wisd. vi. 6.</note> and
that <q>judgment should begin at the house of God.</q><note place='foot'>I.
Pet. iv. 17.</note>
The words of the Apostle are present to his mind:
<q>What hast thou that thou hast not received?
And if thou hast received, why dost thou glory as
if thou hadst not received it?</q><note place='foot'>I. Cor. iv. 7.</note> As well might
the vessel that is filled with precious liquor boast
of being superior to the vessel that is filled with
water. The Priest knows full well that the powers
he has received from God are given to him not to
feed his own vanity, but to enrich the hearts of the
faithful; and that, though instrumental in pointing
out to others the way to heaven, he himself, unless
adorned with personal virtues, will become a
<pb n="395"/><anchor id="Pg395"/>
reprobate, like those unhappy Priests of Jerusalem
who directed the Magi to Jesus in Bethlehem,
but did not go thither themselves.
</p>

<p>
<q>I have planted,</q> says the Apostle, <q>Apollo
watered, but God gave the increase. Therefore,
neither he that planteth is anything, nor he that
watereth, but God that giveth the increase.</q><note place='foot'>Cor.
iii. 6, 7.</note> We
perform the outward ceremony; God alone supplies
the grace.
</p>

<p>
The obligations of the minister of God are, therefore
commensurate with his exalted dignity.
</p>

<p>
The Priest is required to be a man of profound
learning and of solid piety. <q>The lips of the
Priest shall keep knowledge, and they (the people)
shall seek the law at his mouth.</q><note place='foot'>Malach.
ii. 7.</note> The Lord denounces
the Priests of the Old Law because they
neglected to study the Sacred Sciences: <q>Because
thou hast rejected knowledge, I will reject thee,
that thou shalt not do the office of priesthood for
Me, and thou hast forgotten the law of thy God, I
will also forget thy children.</q><note place='foot'>Osee. iv. 6.</note>
</p>

<p>
<q>To you,</q> says our Lord to His Apostles, <q>it is
given to know the mystery of the Kingdom of God,
to the rest, in parables.</q> The Priests of the New
Law, like the Apostles, are the custodians of the
mysteries of religion.
</p>

<p>
Now we know that the knowledge of God's Kingdom
is not imparted to us by inspiration or revelation.
Christ does not personally teach us as He
taught His Apostles. It is by hard study that the
knowledge of His law is acquired by us. He does
not lift us up on Angels' wings to the spiritual
Parnassus. It is only by the royal road of earnest
labor that we can attain those heights which will
enable us to contemplate the Kingdom of heaven
and describe it to others.
</p>

<pb n="396"/><anchor id="Pg396"/>

<p>
As physician of the soul, he must be conversant
with its various distempers and must know what
remedy is to be applied in each particular case. If
society justly holds the unskilful physician responsible
for the fatal consequences of his malpractice,
surely God will call to a strict account the spiritual
physician who, through criminal ignorance, prescribes
injudicious remedies to the souls of the
patients committed to his charge.
</p>

<p>
As judge of souls, he must know when to bind
and when to loose, when to defer and when to pronounce
sentence of absolution. If nothing is so
disastrous to the Republic as an incompetent
judge, whose decisions, though involving life and
death, are rendered at hap-hazard and not in accordance
with the merits of the case, so nothing is
more detrimental to the Christian commonwealth
than an ignorant priesthood, whose decisions injuriously
affect the salvation of souls.
</p>

<p>
The advocate in our courts of justice feels bound
in conscience and in honor to study the case of his
client with the utmost diligence, and to defend him
before the jury with all the eloquence he can master.
And yet the suit may not involve more than
a brief imprisonment or even a limited fine.
</p>

<p>
But the Priest, like Moses, stands before God
to intercede for His people, and before the people
to advocate the cause of God. He not only ascends
daily the altar to plead for the people and to cry
out with the prophet, <q>Spare, O Lord, spare Thy
people, and give not Thy inheritance to reproach;</q>
but every Sunday he mounts the pulpit
to vindicate the claims which God has on His
subjects. Certainly, if an attorney is bound to
study his client's cause before he defends it, no
matter how trifling the issue, how much more imperative
is the obligation of the Priest to study
<pb n="397"/><anchor id="Pg397"/>
well his case, when he reflects that an immortal
soul is on trial, and before men who are often the
worst enemies of their own soul. He has to convince
the people that the narrow road, which their
inclinations abhor, is to be followed; and that the
broad road, which their self-love and their passions
tend to pursue, is to be abandoned. Conviction
in this case requires rare tact as well as eloquence
and learning.
</p>

<p>
But the minister of religion has to defend the
soul not only against the corruptions of the heart,
but also against those doctrinal errors that are
daily springing up in every direction, and which
are plausibly preached by false teachers, who
bring to their support the most specious arguments,
couched in the most attractive language.
To refute these errors often requires the most
consummate skill and a profound knowledge of
history and the Holy Scripture.
</p>

<p>
It is no wonder, then, that the Church insists
that her clergy be educated men. Hence our ecclesiastical
students are usually obliged to devote
from ten to fourteen years to the diligent study of
the modern and ancient languages, of history and
philosophy, of the great science of theology and
Holy Scripture, before they are elevated to the
sacred ministry.
</p>

<p>
It is true, indeed, that, owing to the rapidly-increasing
demand for clergy in the United States,
our Bishops have hitherto been sometimes compelled
to abridge the course of studies of the candidates
for the ministry; but now that the Church
is more thoroughly organized, and that seminaries
are multiplied among us, they are happily enabled
to extend to their young levites the advantages of
a full term of literary and theological training.
</p>

<p>
If the Priest should be eminent for his learning,
<pb n="398"/><anchor id="Pg398"/>
he should be still more conspicuous for his virtues,
for he is expected to preach more by example than
by precept. If in the Old Law God charged His
Priests with the admonition: <q>Be sanctified, ye
that carry the vessels of the Lord,</q><note place='foot'>Isaiah lii. 11.</note> how much
more strictly is holiness of life enjoined on the
Priests of the New Dispensation, who not only
touch the sacred vessels, but drink from them the
Precious Blood of the Lord?
</p>

<p>
<q>Purer,</q> says St. Chrysostom, <q>than any solar
ray should that hand be which divides that flesh,
that mouth which is filled with spiritual fire, that
tongue which is purpled with that most awful
blood.</q>
</p>

<p>
In order to foster in us the spirit of personal
piety, we are constantly admonished by the Church
to be men of prayer. The Priest should be like
those angels whom Jacob saw in a vision, ascending
to heaven and descending therefrom on the
mystical ladder. He is expected to ascend by
prayer and to descend by preaching. He ascends
to heaven to receive light from God; he descends
to communicate that light to his hearers. He
ascends to draw at the Fountain of Divine grace,
he descends to diffuse those living waters among
the faithful, that their hearts may be refreshed.
He ascends to light his torch at the ever-burning
furnace of Divine love; he descends to communicate
the flame to the souls of his people.
</p>

<p>
The Church, indeed, considers prayer so indispensable
to her clergy that, besides the voluntary
exercises of piety which their private devotion
may suggest, she requires them to devote at least
an hour each day to the recitation of the Divine
Office, which chiefly consists of the Psalms and other
portions of Holy Scripture, the Homilies of the early
Fathers and prayers of marvelous force and unction.
</p>

</div>

<pb n="399"/><anchor id="Pg399"/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc' level1='Chapter XXX. Celibacy Of The Clergy.'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='Chapter XXX.'/>
<head type='sub'>Chapter XXX.</head>
<head>Celibacy Of The Clergy.</head>

<p>
The Church requires her Priests to be pure in
body as well as in soul, and to <q>present their
bodies a living victim, holy, well-pleasing
unto God.</q><note place='foot'>Rom. xii. 1.</note>
</p>

<p>
Our Savior and His Apostles, though recognizing
matrimony as a holy state, have proclaimed the
superior merits of voluntary continency, particularly
for those who consecrate their lives to
the sacred ministry. <q>There are eunuchs who
have made themselves such for the Kingdom of
Heaven's sake. He who can take it, let him take
it.</q><note place='foot'>Matt. xix. 12.</note> Our Lord evidently recommends here the
state of celibacy to such as feel themselves called
to embrace it, in order to attain greater perfection.
</p>

<p>
St. Paul gives the reason why our Savior declares
continency to be a more suitable state for
His ministers than that of matrimony: <q>He who
is unmarried careth for the things of the Lord&mdash;how
he may please God. But he who is married
is solicitous about the things of the world&mdash;how
he may please his wife&mdash;and he is divided.</q><note place='foot'>I.
Cor. vii. 32, 33.</note>
</p>

<p>
Jesus Christ manifestly showed His predilection
for virginity, not only by always remaining a virgin,
but by selecting a Virgin-Mother and a virgin-precursor
in the person of St. John the Baptist,
and by exhibiting a special effection for John
<pb n="400"/><anchor id="Pg400"/>
the Evangelist, because, as St. Augustine testifies,
that Apostle was chosen a virgin and such he always
remained.
</p>

<p>
Not only did our Lord thus manifest while on
earth a marked predilection for virgins, but He
exhibits the same preference for them in heaven;
for the hundred and forty-four thousand who are
chosen to sing the New Canticle and who follow
the Lamb whithersoever He goeth are all virgins,
as St. John testifies. (Apoc. xiv.)
</p>

<p>
The Apostle of the Gentiles assures us that he
led a single life, and he commends that state to
others: <q>I say to the unmarried, and to the
widows it is good for them if they so continue, even
as I.</q><note place='foot'>I. Cor. vii. 8.</note>
</p>

<p>
There is no evidence from Scripture that any of
the Apostles were married except St. Peter. St.
Jerome says that if any were married they certainly
separated from their wives after they were
called to the Apostolate. Even St. Peter, after his
vocation, did not continue with his wife, as may
be inferred from his own words: <q>Behold, we
have left all things, and followed Thee.</q><note place='foot'>Matt.
xix. 27.</note> Among
<q>all things</q> must be reckoned the fellowship of
his wife, for he could hardly say with truth that
he had left all things if he had not left his wife.
Our Savior immediately after enumerates the wife
among those cherished objects, the renunciation of
which, for His sake, will have its reward.<note place='foot'>Ibid., xix. 29.</note>
</p>

<p>
St. Paul declares that <q>a Bishop must be sober,
just, holy, continent.</q><note place='foot'>Tit. i. 8.</note> And writing to Timothy,
whom he had consecrated Bishop, he says: <q>Be
thou an example to the faithful ... in charity, in
faith, in <emph>chastity</emph>.</q><note place='foot'>I.
Tim. iv. 12.</note> In another place, he enumerates
chastity among the virtues that should
<pb n="401"/><anchor id="Pg401"/>
adorn the Christian minister: <q>In all things let us
exhibit ourselves as the ministers of God in much
patience, ... in chastity.</q><note place='foot'>II. Cor. vi. 46.</note>
</p>

<p>
Although celibacy is not expressly enforced by
our Savior, it is, however, commended so strongly
by Himself and His Apostles, both by word and
example, that the Church felt it her duty to lay it
down as a law.
</p>

<p>
The discipline of the Church has been exerted
from the beginning in prohibiting Priests to marry
<emph>after</emph> their ordination. St. Jerome observes that
<q>Bishops, Priests and Deacons are chosen from
virgins or widowers, or, at least, they remain perpetually
chaste after being elevated to the priesthood.</q><note place='foot'>Ep.
ad Pammach.</note>
To Jovinian he writes: <q>You certainly
admit that he cannot remain a Bishop who begets
children in the episcopacy; for, if convicted, he will
not be esteemed as a husband, but condemned as
an adulterer.</q><note place='foot'>Adv. Jovin., lib.
1.</note> Again he says: <q>What will the
churches of the East, of Egypt and of the Apostolic
See do, which adopt their clergy from among
virgins, or if they have wives, they cease to live as
married men.</q><note place='foot'>Adv. Vigilantium.</note>
</p>

<p>
St. Epiphanius declares that <q>he who leads a
married life is not admitted by the Church to the
order of Deacon, Priest, Bishop or sub-Deacon.</q><note place='foot'>Hæres.
59, c. 4.</note>
</p>

<p>
In the primitive days of the Church, owing to the
scarcity of vocations among the unmarried, married
men were admitted to sacred orders, but they
were enjoined, as we learn from various canons,
to live separated from their wives after their
ordination.
</p>

<p>
This discipline, it is true, was relaxed to some
extent in favor of a portion of the clergy of the
Oriental Church, who were permitted to live with
<pb n="402"/><anchor id="Pg402"/>
their wives if they happened to espouse them before
ordination; but, like the Priests of the Western
Church, the Eastern clergy were forbidden to
contract marriage after their ordination. It is
important also to observe that the unmarried
clergy of the East are held in much higher esteem
by the people than the married Priests.
</p>

<p>
It cannot, indeed, be denied that at certain
epochs of the Church's history, especially in
periods of disordered society, there were too many
instances of the violation of clerical celibacy. But
the repeated violations of a law are no evidence of
its non-existence. Whenever the voice of the
Church could be heard it always spoke in vindication
of the law of priestly chastity.
</p>

<p>
Let me now call your attention to the propriety
and advantages of clerical celibacy.
</p>

<p>
First&mdash;The Priest is the representative of Jesus
Christ. He continues the work begun by his
Divine Master. It is his duty to preach the word,
to administer the Sacraments, and, above all, to
consecrate the Body and Blood of Christ and to
distribute the same to the faithful. Is it not becoming
that a chaste Lord should be served by
chaste ministers?
</p>

<p>
If the Jewish Priests, while engaged in their
turn in offering the sacrifice of animals in the
Temple, were obliged to keep apart from their
wives, should not the Priests of the New Law, who
offer daily the sacrifice of the Immaculate Lamb,
practise continual chastity?
</p>

<p>
If David and his friends were not permitted to
eat the bread of Proposition till he had avowed
that for the three preceding days they had refrained
from women,<note place='foot'>I. Kings xxi.</note> how pure in body and soul
should be the Priest who daily partakes of that
<pb n="403"/><anchor id="Pg403"/>
living Bread of which the bread of Proposition
was but the type; and if the people at Mount Sinai
were forbidden to come near their wives for three
days before receiving the Law,<note place='foot'>Exod. xix.</note> should not they
whose office it is to preach the Law at all times
abstain altogether?
</p>

<p>
Thorndyke, an eminent Protestant Divine, in
his work entitled, <hi rend='italic'>Just Weights and Measures</hi>,
makes the following observation: <q>The reason for
single life for the clergy is firmly grounded, by the
Fathers and canons of the Church, upon the precept
of St. Paul, forbidding man and wife to depart
unless for a time, to attend unto prayer (I.
Cor. vii. 5). For, Priests and Deacons being continually
to attend upon occasions of celebrating
the Eucharist, which ought continually to be frequented;
if others be to abstain from the use of
marriage for a time, then they always.</q><note place='foot'>Page 239.</note>
</p>

<p>
Second&mdash;Writers frequently discuss the secret
cause of the marvelous success which marks the
growth of the Catholic Church everywhere in spite
of the most formidable opposition. Some ascribe
this progress to her thorough organization; others
to the far-seeing wisdom of her chief pastors.
Without undervaluing these and other auxiliaries,
I incline to the belief that, under God, the Church
has no tower of strength more potent than the
celibacy of her clergy. The unmarried Priest, as
St. Paul observes (1 Cor. vii.), is free to give his
whole time undivided to the Lord, and can devote
his attention not to one or two children, but to the
entire flock whom he has begotten in Christ Jesus,
through the Gospel; while the married minister is
divided between the cares of his family and his
duties to the congregation. <q>A single life,</q> says
Bacon, <q>doth well with churchmen; for, charity
<pb n="404"/><anchor id="Pg404"/>
will hardly water the ground where it must first
fill a pool.</q><note place='foot'>Essays, p. 17.</note>
</p>

<p>
Third&mdash;The world has hitherto been converted
by unmarried clergymen, and only by them will it
continue to be converted. St. Francis Xavier and
St. Francis de Sales could not have planted the
faith in so many thousands of souls if they were
accompanied on their journeys by their wives and
children. Of all the gems that adorn the priestly
diadem, none is so precious and indispensable in
the eyes of the people as the peerless jewel of
chastity. Without this pearl the voice of a Hyacinthe
<q>becomes as sounding brass and a tinkling
cymbal;</q> with it, the humblest missioner gains
the hearts of multitudes.
</p>

<p>
Everybody is aware of the numerous conversions
to Christianity effected by St. Francis
Xavier in Japan in the sixteenth century. After
the lapse of many years from the death of St.
Francis, when a French squadron was permitted
to enter the Japanese ports, a native Christian,
named Peter, having learned that French Priests
were on board, put their faith to the test by proposing
to them these three questions: <q>Are you
followers of the great Father in Rome? Do you
honor Mary, the Blessed Virgin? Have you
wives?</q> The French priests having satisfied
their interrogator on these points, and especially
on the last, Peter and his companions fell at the
missioners' feet, exclaiming with delight
<q>Thanks, thanks! they are virgins and true disciples
of our Apostle Francis.</q><note place='foot'>Annals
of the Propagation of the Faith, March, 1868.</note>
</p>

<p>
A contemporary writer has wittily remarked
that <q>perhaps the most ardent admirer of hymeneal
rites would cheerfully admit that he could not
<pb n="405"/><anchor id="Pg405"/>
conceive St. Paul or St. John starting on a nuptial
tour, accompanied by the latest fashions from
Athens or Ephesus, and the graceful brides whom
they were destined to adorn. They would feel
that Christianity itself could not survive such a
vision as that. Nor could the imagination, in its
wildest moods, picture the majestic adversary of
the Arian Emperor attended in his flight up the
Nile by Mistress Athanasius, nor St. John Chrysostom
escorted in his wanderings through Phrygia
by the wife of his bosom arrayed in a wreath
of orange-blossoms. Would Ethelbert have become
a Christian if St. Augustine had introduced
to him his lady and her bridesmaids?</q><note place='foot'>Marshall,
Comedy of Convocation.</note>
</p>

<p>
We frequently hear of unmarried Bishops and
Priests laying down their lives for the faith in
China and Corea and imprisoned in Germany.
Heroic sacrifices such as these are, however, too
much to be expected from men enjoying the domestic
luxury and engrossed by the responsibility
of a wife and children.
</p>

<p>
But does not St. Paul authorize the marriage of
the clergy when he says: <q>Have we not power to
carry about a woman, a sister, as well as the rest
of the Apostles?</q><note place='foot'>I. Cor. ix. 5.</note>
The Protestant text mis-translates
this passage by substituting the word
<emph>wife</emph> for <emph>woman</emph>. It is evident that St. Paul does
not speak here of his wife, since he had none; but
he alludes to those pious women who voluntarily
waited on the Apostles, and ministered to them in
their missionary journeys.
</p>

<p>
It is also objected that the Apostle seems to require
that a Bishop be <q>the husband of one
wife.</q><note place='foot'>I. Tim. iii. 2.</note>
The context certainly cannot mean that
a Bishop must be a married man, for the reason
<pb n="406"/><anchor id="Pg406"/>
already given, that St. Paul himself was never
married. The sense of the text, as all tradition
testifies, is that no candidate should be elected to
the office of Bishop who had been married more
than once. It was not possible in those days always
to select single men for the Episcopal office.
Hence the Church was often compelled to choose
married persons, but always with this restriction,
that they had never contracted nuptials a second
time. They were obliged, moreover, if not widowers,
to live separated from their wives.
</p>

<p>
Others adduce against clerical celibacy these
words of St. Paul: <q>In the last times some shall
depart from the faith, giving heed to spirits of
error, ... forbidding to marry.</q><note place='foot'>I.
Tim. iv. 1-3.</note> This passage,
however, alludes to the Ebionites, Gnostics and
Manicheans, who positively taught that marriage
is sinful. The Catholic Church, on the contrary,
holds that matrimony is not only a lawful state,
for those who are called to embrace it, but that it
is also a Sacrament, and that the highest degree
of holiness is attainable in conjugal life.
</p>

<p>
Some go so far as to declare continency impracticable.
Our dissenting brethren in the ministry
are so uxoriously inclined that, perhaps, for this
reason they dispute the possibility, as well as the
privilege, of Priests to remain single. But in
making this assertion they impugn the wisdom
of Jesus Christ and His Apostle, who lived in this
state and recommended it to others; they slander
consecrated Priests and nuns, and they unwittingly
question the purity of their own unmarried
sisters, daughters and sons. How many men and
women are there in the world who spend years,
nay, their whole lives, in the single state? And
<pb n="407"/><anchor id="Pg407"/>
who shall dare to accuse such a multitude of incontinency?
</p>

<p>
Nor should any one complain of the severity of
the law of clerical celibacy, since the candidate voluntarily
accepts the obligations after mature consideration.
</p>

<p>
Finally, it cannot be urged against celibacy that
it violates the Divine precept to <q>increase and
multiply;</q> for this command surely cannot require
all marriageable persons to be united in wedlock.
Otherwise, bachelors and spinsters would
also be guilty of violating the law. The number
of men and women consecrated to God by vows of
chastity forms but an imperceptible fraction of the
human family, their proportion in the United
States, for instance, being only one individual to
about every four thousand. Moreover, it is an
incontrovertible fact that the population increases
most in those countries in which the Catholic
clergy exercise the strongest influence; for there
married people are impressed with the idea that
marriage was instituted not for the gratification of
the flesh, but for the procreation and Christian
education of children.
</p>

</div>

<pb n="408"/><anchor id="Pg408"/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc' level1='Chapter XXXI. Matrimony.'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='Chapter XXXI.'/>
<head type='sub'>Chapter XXXI.</head>
<head>Matrimony.</head>

<p>
Matrimony is not only a natural contract
between husband and wife, but it has been
elevated for Christians, by Jesus Christ,
to the dignity of a Sacrament: <q>Husbands,</q> says
the Apostle, <q>love your wives, as Christ also
loved the Church and delivered Himself up for it, ...
so also ought men to love their wives as their
own bodies.... For this cause shall a man leave
his father and mother, and shall adhere to his
wife and they shall be one flesh. This is a great
sacrament: but I speak in Christ and in the
Church.</q><note place='foot'>Ephes. v. 25-32.</note>
</p>

<p>
In these words the Apostle declares that the
union of Christ with His Church is the type or
model of the bond subsisting between man and
wife. Now the union between Christ and His
Church is supernatural and sealed by Divine
grace. Hence, also, is the fellowship of a Christian
husband and wife cemented by the grace of
God. The wedded couple are bound to love one
another during their whole lives, as Christ has
loved His Church, and to discharge the virtues
proper to the married state. In order to fulfil
these duties special graces of our Savior are required.
</p>

<p>
The Fathers, Councils and Liturgies of the
<pb n="409"/><anchor id="Pg409"/>
Western and the Oriental Churches, including the
Coptic, Jacobite, Syriac, Nestorian and other schismatic
bodies, which for upwards of fourteen centuries
have been separated from the Catholic communion,
all agree in recognizing Christian marriage
as a Sacrament.
</p>

<p>
Hence the Council of Trent, speaking of Matrimony,
says: <q>Christ Himself, the Institutor and
Perfector of the venerable sacraments, merited
for us by His passion the grace which might perfect
that natural love, and confirm that indissoluble
union, and sanctify the married; as the
Apostle Paul intimates, saying: <q>Husbands, love
your wives, as Christ also loved the Church, and
delivered Himself for it;</q> adding shortly after:
<q>This is a great sacrament, but I speak in Christ
and in the Church.</q> (Ephes. v.) Whereas, therefore
matrimony, in the evangelical law, excels in
grace, through Christ, the ancient marriages; with
reason have our holy Fathers and Councils and
the tradition of the universal Church always
taught that it is to be numbered among the sacraments
of the new law.</q><note place='foot'>Sess. xxiv.</note>
</p>

<p>
The Gospel forbids a man to have more than
one wife, and a wife to have more than one husband.
<q>Have you not read,</q> says our Savior,
<q>that He who made man in the beginning made
them male and female? And He said, for this
cause shall a man leave father and mother, and
shall cleave unto <emph>his wife, and they two shall be
in one flesh</emph>. Wherefore they are no more two,
but one flesh.</q><note place='foot'>Matt. xix.
4-6.</note> Our Lord recalls marriage to
its primitive institution as it was ordained by
Almighty God. (Gen. ii.) Now, marriage in its
primitive ordinance was the union of one man
with one woman, for Jehovah created but one helpmate
<pb n="410"/><anchor id="Pg410"/>
to Adam. He would have created more, if His
design had been to establish polygamy. The Scripture
says that <q>man shall adhere to his <emph>wife</emph>,</q>&mdash;not
<emph>his wives</emph>. It does not declare that they shall
be three or more, but that <q>they shall be two in
one flesh.</q>
</p>

<p>
Hence Mormonism, unhappily so prevalent in
the United States, is at variance with the plain
teachings of the Gospel, and is consequently condemned
by the Catholic Church. Polygamy, wherever
it exists, cannot fail to be a perpetual source
of family discord and feuds. It fosters deadly
jealousy and hate among the wives of the same
household; it deranges the laws of succession and
primogeniture and breeds rivalry among the children,
each endeavoring to supplant the other in
the affections and the inheritance of their common
father.
</p>

<p>
Marriage is the most inviolable and irrevocable
of all contracts that were ever formed. Every
human compact may be lawfully dissolved but
this. Nations may be justified in abrogating
treaties with each other; merchants may dissolve
partnerships; brothers will eventually leave the
paternal roof, and, like Jacob and Esau, separate
from one another. Friends, like Abraham and
Lot, may be obliged to part company. But by the
law of God the bond uniting husband and wife
can be dissolved only by death. No earthly sword
can sever the nuptial knot which the Lord has
tied; for, <q>what God hath joined together, let no
man put asunder.</q>
</p>

<p>
It is worthy of remark that three of the Evangelists,
as well as the Apostle of the Gentiles, proclaim
the indissolubility of marriage and forbid
a wedded person to engage in second wedlock
during the life of his spouse. There is, indeed,
<pb n="411"/><anchor id="Pg411"/>
scarcely a moral precept more strongly enforced
in the Gospel than the indissoluble character of
marriage validly contracted.
</p>

<p>
<q>The Pharisees came to Jesus, tempting Him
and saying: Is it lawful for a man to put
away his wife for every cause? Who, answering,
said to them: Have ye not read that He who
made man from the beginning made them male
and female? And He said: For this cause shall
a man leave father and mother, and shall cleave
to his wife, and they two shall be one flesh.
Therefore now they are not two, but one flesh.
What, therefore, God hath joined together let no
man put asunder. They say to Him: Why, then,
did Moses command to give a bill of divorce and
to put away? He said to them: Because Moses,
by reason of the hardness of your heart, permitted
you to put away your wives; but from the
beginning it was not so. And I say to you, that
whosoever shall put away his wife, except it be for
fornication, and shall marry another committeth
adultery: and he that shall marry her that is
put away committeth adultery.</q><note place='foot'>Matt.
xix. 3-9.</note> Our Savior here
emphatically declares that the nuptial bond is
ratified by God Himself, and hence that no man,
nor any legislation framed by men, can validly
dissolve the contract.
</p>

<p>
To the Pharisees interposing this objection, if
marriage is not to be dissolved, why then did
Moses command to give a divorce, our Lord replies
that Moses did not command, but simply
<emph>permitted</emph> the separation, and that in tolerating
this indulgence the great lawgiver had regard to
the violent passion of the Jewish people, who
would fall into a greater excess if their desire
to be divorced and to form a new alliance were
<pb n="412"/><anchor id="Pg412"/>
refused. But our Savior reminded them that in
the primitive times no such license was granted.
</p>

<p>
He then plainly affirms that such a privilege
would not be conceded in the New Dispensation,
for He adds: <q>I say to you: whosoever shall
put away his wife and shall marry another committeth
adultery.</q> Protestant commentators erroneously
assert that the text justifies an injured
husband in separating from his adulterous wife
and in marrying again. But the Catholic Church
explains the Gospel in the sense that, while the
offended consort may obtain a divorce from bed
and board from his unfaithful wife, he is not allowed
a divorce <hi rend='italic'>a vinculo matrimonii</hi>, so as to
have the privilege of marrying another.
</p>

<p>
This interpretation is confirmed by the concurrent
testimony of the Evangelists Mark and Luke
and by St. Paul, all of whom prohibit divorce <hi rend='italic'>a
vinculo</hi> without any qualification whatever.
</p>

<p>
In St. Mark we read: <q>Whosoever shall put
away his wife and marry another committeth
adultery against her. And if the wife shall put
away her husband and be married to another she
committeth adultery.</q><note place='foot'>Mark x. 11, 12.</note>
</p>

<p>
The same unqualified declaration is made by
St. Luke: <q>Every one that putteth away his wife
and marrieth another committeth adultery; and
he that marrieth her that is put away from her
husband committeth adultery.</q><note place='foot'>Luke xvi. 18.</note> Both of these
Evangelists forbid either husband or wife to enter
into second wedlock, how aggravating soever
may be the cause of their separation. And surely,
if the case of adultery authorized the aggrieved
husband to marry another wife, those inspired
penmen would not have failed to mention that
qualifying circumstance.
</p>

<pb n="413"/><anchor id="Pg413"/>

<p>
Passing from the Gospels to the Epistle of St.
Paul to the Corinthians, we find there also an
absolute prohibition of divorce. The Apostle
is writing to a city newly converted to the Christian
religion. Among other topics he inculcates
the doctrine of the Church respecting Matrimony.
We must suppose that as an inspired writer and
a faithful minister of the Word he discharges his
duty conscientiously, without suppressing or extenuating
one iota of the law. He addresses the
Corinthians as follows: <q>To them that are married
not I, but the Lord, commandeth that the
wife depart not from her husband. And if she
depart that she remain unmarried, or be reconciled
to her husband. And let not the husband
put away his wife.</q><note place='foot'>I.
Cor. vii. 10, 11.</note> Here we find the Apostle,
in his Master's name, commanding the separated
couple to remain unmarried, without any reference
to the case of adultery. If so important an
exception existed, St. Paul would not have omitted
to mention it; otherwise he would have rendered
the Gospel yoke more grievous than its
Founder intended.
</p>

<p>
We must, therefore, admit that, according to
the religion of Jesus Christ, conjugal infidelity
does not warrant either party to marry again,
or we are forced to the conclusion that the vast
number of Christians whose knowledge of Christianity
was derived solely from the teachings of
Saints Mark, Luke and Paul were imperfectly
instructed in their faith.
</p>

<p>
Nor can we suppose that St. Matthew gave to
the married Christians of Palestine a privilege
which St. Paul withheld from the Corinthians;
for then the early Christian Church might have
witnessed the disedifying spectacle of aggrieved
<pb n="414"/><anchor id="Pg414"/>
husbands seeking in Judea for a divorce from
their adulterous wives which they could not obtain
in Corinth, just as discontented spouses, in
our times, sue in a neighboring State for a legal
separation which is denied them in their own.
Christ is not divided, nor do the Apostles contradict
one another.
</p>

<p>
The Catholic Church, following the light of the
Gospel, forbids a divorced man to enter into second
espousals during the life of his former partner.
This is the inflexible law she first proclaimed
in the face of Pagan Emperors and people
and which she has ever upheld, in spite of
the passions and voluptuousness of her own rebellious
children.
</p>

<p>
Henry VIII., once an obedient son and defender
of the Church, conceived in an evil hour, a criminal
attachment for Anne Boleyn, a lady of the
queen's household, whom he desired to marry
after being divorced from his lawful consort,
Catherine of Arragon. But Pope Clement VII.,
whose sanction he solicited, sternly refused to
ratify the separation, though the Pontiff could
have easily forseen that his determined action
would involve the Church in persecution, and a
whole nation in the unhappy schism of its ruler.
Had the Pope acquiesced in the repudiation of
Catherine, and in the marriage of Anne Boleyn,
England would, indeed, have been spared to the
Church, but the Church herself would have surrendered
her peerless title of Mistress of Truth.
</p>

<p>
When Napoleon I. repudiated his devoted wife,
Josephine, and married Marie Louise, of Austria,
so well assured was he of the fruitlessness
of his attempt to obtain from the Holy See the
sanction of his divorce and subsequent marriage
<pb n="415"/><anchor id="Pg415"/>
that he did not even consult the Holy Father on
the subject.
</p>

<p>
A few years previously Napoleon appealed to
Pius VII. to annul the marriage which his
brother Jerome had contracted with Miss Patterson
of Baltimore. The Pope sent the following
reply to the Emperor: <q>Your majesty will
understand that upon the information thus far
received by us it is not in our power to pronounce
a sentence of nullity. We cannot utter a
judgment in opposition to the rules of the Church,
and we could not, without laying aside those rules,
decree the invalidity of a union which, according
to the Word of God, no human power can sunder.</q>
</p>

<p>
Christian wives and mothers, what gratitude
you owe to the Catholic Church for the honorable
position you now hold in society! If you are no
longer regarded as the slave, but the equal of
your husband; if you are no longer the toy of his
caprice and liable to be discarded at any moment,
like the women of Turkey and the Mormon wives
of Utah; but if you are recognized as the mistress
and queen of your household, you owe your
emancipation to the Church. You are especially
indebted for your liberty to the Popes who rose
up in all the majesty of their spiritual power to
vindicate the rights of injured wives against the
lustful tyranny of their husbands.
</p>

<p>
How opposite is the conduct of the fathers of
the so-called Reformation, who, with the cry of
religious reform on their lips, deformed religion
and society by sanctioning divorce.
</p>

<p>
Henry VIII. was divorced from his wife, Catherine,
by Cranmer, the first Reformed Primate of
England.
</p>

<p>
Luther and his colleagues, Melanchthon and
Bucer, permitted Philip, Landgrave of Hesse,
<pb n="416"/><anchor id="Pg416"/>
to have two wives at the same time.<note place='foot'>Bossuet,
Variations, Vol. 1.</note> Karlstadt,
another German Reformer, justified polygamy.<note place='foot'>Audin, p. 339.</note>
</p>

<p>
Modern Prussia is now reaping the bitter fruits
of the seeds that were then sown within its borders.
Seventy-five per cent. of the marriages
now contracted outside of the Catholic Church
in Berlin are performed without any religious
ceremony whatever. A union not bound by the
strong ties of religion is easily dissolved.
</p>

<p>
This subject excites a painful interest in our
own country, in consequence of the facility with
which divorce from the marriage bond is obtained
in many of our States. We have here another
exemplification of the dangerous consequences attending
a private interpretation of the sacred
text. When Luther and Calvin proclaimed to
the world that <q>it was not wise to prohibit the
divorced adulterer from marrying again,</q><note place='foot'>American
Cyclop., art Divorce. Our Savior declares that
he who marrieth an adulteress committeth adultery. Yet
Luther and Calvin declare that it is unwise to oppose such a
marriage. But <q>the foolishness of God is wiser than men.</q>
And Wisdom has said: <q>I will destroy the wisdom of the
wise.</q> (I. Cor. i.)</note> they
little dreamed of the fruitful progeny which was
destined before long to spring from this isolated
monster of their creation. There are already
about thirty causes which allow the conjugal tie
to be broken, some of which are of so trifling a
nature as to provoke merriment were it not for
the gravity of the subject, which is well calculated
to excite alarm for the moral and social welfare
of our country.
</p>

<p>
Persons are divorced by the courts not only for
infidelity, but also without even the shadow of
Scripture authority&mdash;for alleged cruelty, intemperance,
<pb n="417"/><anchor id="Pg417"/>
desertion, prolonged absence, mental incapacity,
sentence to the penitentiary, incompatibility
of temper and <emph>such other causes as the
court, in its discretion, may deem sufficient</emph>.
</p>

<p>
For the year ending June, 1874, seventeen hundred
and forty-two applications for divorce were
presented in the State of Ohio. If such is Ohio's
record, what must be the matrimonial condition
of Indiana, which is called the paradise of discontented
spouses.
</p>

<p>
In Connecticut there were, in 1875, four thousand
three hundred and eighty-five marriages, and
four hundred and sixty-six divorces from the marriage
bond. The number of divorces obtained in
the same State during the last fifteen years has
reached five thousand three hundred and ninety-one.
This is the record of a State whose public
school system is considered the most thorough
and perfect in the country. The statistics given
of Ohio and Connecticut will enable us to form
some idea of the fearful catalogue of divorces
annually obtained in the United States.
</p>

<p>
There are some who regard the Catholic Church
as too severe in proclaiming the absolute indissolubility
of marriage. But it should be borne
in mind that it is not the Church, but the Divine
Founder of the Christian religion, that has given
us the law. She merely enforces its observance.
</p>

<p>
The law, how rigorous soever, is mercy itself,
when compared with the cruel consequences
which follow from the easy concession of divorce.
</p>

<p>
The facility with which marriage is annulled
is most injurious to the morals of individuals, of
the family and of society. It leads to ill-assorted
and hasty marriages, because persons are less circumspect
in making a compact which may be afterwards
dissolved almost at will. It stimulates a
<pb n="418"/><anchor id="Pg418"/>
discontented and unprincipled husband or wife
to lawlessness, quarrels and even adultery, well
knowing that the very crime will afford a pretext
and legal grounds for a separation. It engenders
between husband and wife fierce litigations
about the custody of their offspring. It
deprives the children of the protecting arm of a
father, or of the gentle care of a mother, and
too frequently consigns them to the cold charity
of the world; for the married couple who are
wanting in conjugal love for one another are
too often destitute also of parental affection. In
a word, it brings into the household a blight and
desolation which neither wealth nor luxury can
repair.
</p>

<p>
There is but one remedy to this social distemper,
and that is an absolute prohibition of divorce
<hi rend='italic'>a vinculo</hi>, in accordance with the inflexible
rule of the Gospel and of the ancient Church. In
Catholic countries divorces are exceedingly rare,
and are obtained only by such as have thrown
off the yoke of the Church. If the sacred laws
of Matrimony are still happily observed by so
large a portion of the Protestant community, the
purity of morals is in no small measure due to
the presence among them of the Catholic religion,
which exercises a beneficial influence even over
those who are outside the pale of her communion,
like the sun, whose benignant light and heat are
felt even in those secluded spots which his rays
can but obliquely and dimly penetrate.
</p>

</div>

<pb n="419"/><anchor id="Pg419"/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Index.</head>

<lg>
<l>Abraham, dear to Jehovah, <ref target="Pg037">37</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Abstinence on Friday explained, <ref target="Pg002">2</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Adoration and reverence compared, <ref target="Pg202">202</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>A'Kempis compared with Bunyan, <ref target="Pg020">20</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>A'Kempis' <q>Following of Christ</q> recommended, <ref target="Pg020">20</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Protestant edition mutilated, <ref target="Pg020">20</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Albertus Magnus on Faith quoted, <ref target="Pg015">15</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>American Independence and Catholic Church, <ref target="Pg240">240</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Angel Raphael and young Tobias, <ref target="Pg155">155</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Angels labor for man's salvation, <ref target="Pg160">160</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Anglican Church began with Henry VIII., <ref target="Pg044">44</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Anne, Queen, praised by Thomas Arundel, <ref target="Pg092">92</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Apostolate of Sisterhoods&mdash;Consecrated Virgins, <ref target="Pg023">23</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Appeals, a proof of Papal Supremacy, <ref target="Pg109">109</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Apostles commissioned to teach, <ref target="Pg029">29</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>transmit infallibility to successors, <ref target="Pg065">65</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not commanded to write, <ref target="Pg080">80</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>ordered to teach and to preach, <ref target="Pg081">81</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>received power to forgive sins, <ref target="Pg342">342</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Apostolic teaching was infallible, <ref target="Pg065">65</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>weapons, <ref target="Pg026">26</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>missionaries sent by Popes, <ref target="Pg115">115</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Apostolicity defined, <ref target="Pg038">38</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a note of the true Church, <ref target="Pg039">39</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>claims of tested, <ref target="Pg040">40</ref>, et seq.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Articles of Faith&mdash;consequences of denial of, <ref target="Pg010">10</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Arian heresy and the Church, <ref target="Pg053">53</ref>, et seq.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Arianism and Protestantism paralleled, <ref target="Pg055">55</ref>, et seq.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Astolphus, King, threatens Rome, <ref target="Pg140">140</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Attila and Pope Leo the Great, <ref target="Pg139">139</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Attributes of Christ&mdash;objects of Church's teaching, <ref target="Pg016">16</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Attributes or Notes of the Church imply infallibility, <ref target="Pg065">65</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Authority of the Church derived from God, <ref target="Pg065">65</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>absence of, causes dissensions, <ref target="Pg097">97</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>authorized versus private interpretation, <ref target="Pg081">81</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of the Book of Machabees, <ref target="Pg214">214</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Barbarians attack Rome, <ref target="Pg139">139</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bancroft's History cited, <ref target="Pg233">233</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Baptism essential for remission of original sin, <ref target="Pg268">268</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>necessary for all, <ref target="Pg268">268</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>must not be delayed, <ref target="Pg273">273</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>effects, <ref target="Pg021">21</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>remits all sin, <ref target="Pg275">275</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>makes us heirs of heaven, <ref target="Pg276">276</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Baptism of desire or martyrdom substitutes for Baptism, <ref target="Pg272">272</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Baptizing, modes of, <ref target="Pg277">277</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bartholomew, Archbishop of Braga, directs crusade, <ref target="Pg027">27</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Becanus teaches value of religious liberty, <ref target="Pg230">230</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bede, Venerable, translated Bible into Saxon, <ref target="Pg091">91</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bible, venerated by the Jews, <ref target="Pg077">77</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>requires the living authority of the Church, <ref target="Pg077">77</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>interpreted by the Sanhedrim, <ref target="Pg077">77</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>expounded by the priests, <ref target="Pg078">78</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a babel among reformers, <ref target="Pg086">86</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>itself unchanging, it causes ever-changing tenets, <ref target="Pg087">87</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>guardian and depository of, is the Catholic Church, <ref target="Pg090">90</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>translated into Saxon by Venerable Bede, <ref target="Pg091">91</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in English, Sir Thomas More on, <ref target="Pg092">92</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>editions prior to Luther, <ref target="Pg092">92</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>early editions in English, <ref target="Pg092">92</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>use of, recommended by Pope Pius VI, <ref target="Pg093">93</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in seminary, <ref target="Pg093">93</ref>, et seq.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>basis of Papal Infallibility, <ref target="Pg125">125</ref>, et seq.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>infallible, not sufficient, <ref target="Pg133">133</ref>, et seq.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not ordered to be multiplied, <ref target="Pg078">78</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Biblical interpretation on</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Deuteronomy, quoted, <ref target="Pg078">78</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>associations never converted nation, <ref target="Pg080">80</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>authorization claimed by Mormons, <ref target="Pg088">88</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>restrictions as to garbled versions, <ref target="Pg092">92</ref>.</l>
<!-- poem -->
</lg>

<pb n="420"/><anchor id="Pg420"/>

<lg>
<l>Bishops, priests and deacons among Protestants, <ref target="Pg010">10</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>first bishop of Rome, was St. Peter, <ref target="Pg106">106</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of Rome, heirs to St. Peter's supremacy, <ref target="Pg108">108</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>convoked councils, <ref target="Pg114">114</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>presided at councils, <ref target="Pg114">114</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bishop Short on Anglicanism, <ref target="Pg044">44</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bond of Union&mdash;Catholic, compared to that of secret orders, <ref target="Pg036">36</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bond&mdash;Nuptial, ratified by God, <ref target="Pg411">411</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Books of Piety adapted to wants, <ref target="Pg019">19</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of Machabees, same authority as other Scriptures, <ref target="Pg214">214</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bride or Spouse of Christ, applied to the Church, <ref target="Pg008">8</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Brownson, Dr., appreciates stand of Church on civil liberty, <ref target="Pg231">231</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bunyan compared with A'Kempis, <ref target="Pg020">20</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Butler's <q>Lives of the Saints</q> and Foxe's <q>Book of Martyrs</q> compared, <ref target="Pg020">20</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Byron, Lord, lauds St. Peter's Church in Rome, <ref target="Pg381">381</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Caranza Bartholomew arrested by the Inquisition, <ref target="Pg257">257</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Carroll, Charles, in American Independence, <ref target="Pg240">240</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Carroll, Rev. John, in American Independence, <ref target="Pg240">240</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Catacombs abound in sacred images, <ref target="Pg196">196</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>earliest churches, <ref target="Pg137">137</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Catechism, Episcopal, treats of Absolution, <ref target="Pg354">354</ref>, et seq.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Catholic bond of union and that of the secret orders compared, <ref target="Pg036">36</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>barons and Archbishop Langton, <ref target="Pg233">233</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>idea of infallibility reasonable and satisfactory, <ref target="Pg135">135</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>priest obliged to read Scriptures, <ref target="Pg094">94</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>priest preaches Christ and Him crucified, <ref target="Pg018">18</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>literature favored by Episcopal clergyman, <ref target="Pg020">20</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>missionaries wherever English is spoken, <ref target="Pg035">35</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>churches burned by Protestants, <ref target="Pg251">251</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Catholics number three hundred millions, <ref target="Pg010">10</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>exhorted to study the Word of God in their homes, <ref target="Pg019">19</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not all holy, <ref target="Pg023">23</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sometimes are sources of scandal, <ref target="Pg023">23</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>and free will, <ref target="Pg023">23</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>consciences not forced, <ref target="Pg023">23</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Washington addresses, <ref target="Pg241">241</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>persecuted by Henry VIII. and Elizabeth, <ref target="Pg250">250</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>by the Puritans, <ref target="Pg251">251</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Catholicity&mdash;prominent attribute of the Church, <ref target="Pg029">29</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>evidences of, in Apostles' Creed, <ref target="Pg029">29</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>defined, <ref target="Pg029">29</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>foreshadowed by the Psalmist, <ref target="Pg029">29</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>foreseen by Prophet Malachy, <ref target="Pg029">29</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not found in the separate sects, <ref target="Pg032">32</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ceremonial of the Mass, <ref target="Pg328">328</ref>, et seq.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ceremonies&mdash;religious, defined, <ref target="Pg320">320</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>described, <ref target="Pg327">327</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>prescribed by God, <ref target="Pg332">332</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>necessary, <ref target="Pg322">322</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Christ's life portrayed, <ref target="Pg017">17</ref>, et seq.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>teachings versus Book of Homilies, <ref target="Pg067">67</ref>, et seq;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>words and private interpretation, <ref target="Pg079">79</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>divinity not proved solely by Scripture, <ref target="Pg079">79</ref>, et seq.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>honored virgins in a special manner, <ref target="Pg400">400</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>instituted matrimony, <ref target="Pg409">409</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>contained entire under each form, <ref target="Pg300">300</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Christian&mdash;a title of nobility, <ref target="Pg017">17</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>obligations it imposes, <ref target="Pg017">17</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>defined as another Christ, <ref target="Pg017">17</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>communions claim perpetuity, <ref target="Pg051">51</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>unity endorsed, <ref target="Pg119">119</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Church teaches one God, <ref target="Pg001">1</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>unity of, <ref target="Pg005">5</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>government requires unity, <ref target="Pg006">6</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>needs visible head, <ref target="Pg006">6</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a kingdom, <ref target="Pg006">6</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Christ founded only one, <ref target="Pg006">6</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Christ's spiritual kingdom, <ref target="Pg007">7</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>government compared to that of state, <ref target="Pg007">7</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of Christ, a sheepfold, <ref target="Pg007">7</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>likened to the sheepfold, <ref target="Pg007">7</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>one chief pastor, one chief shepherd, <ref target="Pg007">7</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>likened to human body, <ref target="Pg007">7</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>compared to a vine, <ref target="Pg008">8</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>bride or spouse of Christ, <ref target="Pg008">8</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>unity as taught by common sense, <ref target="Pg008">8</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>harmony, <ref target="Pg008">8</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>needs common doctrine, <ref target="Pg009">9</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>uniform government, <ref target="Pg009">9</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of England ruled by sovereign, <ref target="Pg009">9</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>alone possesses unity, <ref target="Pg010">10</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>temple of faith, <ref target="Pg010">10</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>her creed identical with past ages, <ref target="Pg011">11</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>faith and government similar, <ref target="Pg011">11</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>does not meddle with political tenets, <ref target="Pg010">10</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>teaches one faith everywhere, <ref target="Pg010">10</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>explains and declares truths implicitly believed, <ref target="Pg015">15</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>authority to decide disputes, <ref target="Pg015">15</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>holiness an attribute of, <ref target="Pg016">16</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a society, <ref target="Pg016">16</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>established for man's sanctification, <ref target="Pg016">16</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>only one founded by Christ, <ref target="Pg006">6</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>inculcates valuable lessons of divine perfection, <ref target="Pg016">16</ref>;</l>
<pb n="421"/><anchor id="Pg421"/>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>invites to a holy life, <ref target="Pg017">17</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>enforces the inculcation of divine precepts, <ref target="Pg018">18</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>affords motives and means of sanctification, <ref target="Pg020">20</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>encourages communion with God, <ref target="Pg020">20</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a watchful mother&mdash;supplies us at each step, <ref target="Pg021">21</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>fruitful in saints, <ref target="Pg022">22</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>still produces saints and apostles, <ref target="Pg022">22</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>has her martyrs in our day, <ref target="Pg022">22</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>still numbers confessors in her ranks, <ref target="Pg022">22</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>saves sinners, <ref target="Pg024">24</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>refuge of the poor, <ref target="Pg024">24</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>her inheritance&mdash;the afflicted, <ref target="Pg025">25</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>possesses means of reform, <ref target="Pg027">27</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>cosmopolitan, <ref target="Pg030">30</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Catholic in name and reality, <ref target="Pg034">34</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>gaining numerically at present, <ref target="Pg035">35</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>apostolical, <ref target="Pg038">38</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>built upon foundation of the Apostles, <ref target="Pg038">38</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>derives her origin from the Apostles, <ref target="Pg048">48</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>indestructible, <ref target="Pg051">51</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>and the barbarous hordes, <ref target="Pg053">53</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>and Mohammedanism, <ref target="Pg053">53</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>and the Arian heresy, <ref target="Pg053">53</ref>, et seq.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>and the Irish people, <ref target="Pg054">54</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>and state, <ref target="Pg057">57</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>her relation to other religious bodies, <ref target="Pg058">58</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>does not need temporal power for preservation, <ref target="Pg058">58</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>and modern progress, <ref target="Pg059">59</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>benefited by scientific appliances and inventions, <ref target="Pg059">59</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>fosters intellectual progress, <ref target="Pg060">60</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>encourages scientific investigation, <ref target="Pg060">60</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>science indebted to her&mdash;has no fear from human liberty, <ref target="Pg061">61</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>outlasts all other governments, <ref target="Pg061">61</ref>, et seq.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>authority comes from God, <ref target="Pg065">65</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>her teaching directed by the Holy Ghost, <ref target="Pg065">65</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>her infallibility proved from Scripture, <ref target="Pg066">66</ref>, et seq.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Christ's promise in favor of the, <ref target="Pg070">70</ref>, <ref target="Pg073">73</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>her doctrines incapable of reform, <ref target="Pg073">73</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>her doctrinal decrees irrevocable, <ref target="Pg076">76</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>divinely appointed teacher of revelation, <ref target="Pg076">76</ref>, <ref target="Pg077">77</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>guardian and depository of the Bible, <ref target="Pg090">90</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>requires a head, <ref target="Pg097">97</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>unity maintained by supreme head, <ref target="Pg077">77</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>only one founded by Christ, <ref target="Pg100">100</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>built on Peter, <ref target="Pg100">100</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>revealed Word of God her Magna Charta, <ref target="Pg124">124</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>exhorts all to honor Mary, <ref target="Pg187">187</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>her practice proves existence of purgatory, <ref target="Pg214">214</ref>, et seq.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Fathers of the&mdash;unanimous in praying for the dead, <ref target="Pg217">217</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>has always promoted civil liberty, <ref target="Pg226">226</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>defends civil rights and liberties, <ref target="Pg231">231</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>conflict with state, <ref target="Pg231">231</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>and American Independence, <ref target="Pg240">240</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>desires no governmental aid, <ref target="Pg246">246</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>does not sanction persecution or bloodshed, <ref target="Pg249">249</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>disavows the excesses of the Spanish Inquisition, <ref target="Pg258">258</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>her practice and the procedure of the Supreme Court compared, <ref target="Pg130">130</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>organization&mdash;American system of, <ref target="Pg246">246</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>her doctrine on unbaptized infants, <ref target="Pg273">273</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>perpetuates Christ's work, <ref target="Pg341">341</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>grants indulgences, <ref target="Pg376">376</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Churches&mdash;earliest Christian were Catacombs, <ref target="Pg137">137</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>fallible&mdash;consequences, <ref target="Pg070">70</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Clement of Alexandria bears witness to spread of Christianity, <ref target="Pg031">31</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Clerical celibacy&mdash;necessity, <ref target="Pg399">399</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>propriety and advantages of, <ref target="Pg402">402</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Clement VII, Pope, refused to sanction divorce of Henry VIII, <ref target="Pg414">414</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Communion with God encouraged by Church, <ref target="Pg020">20</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Communion under both forms given by Christ, <ref target="Pg300">300</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Communion under form of bread, <ref target="Pg303">303</ref>, et seq.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Communion of Saints&mdash;a comforting thought, <ref target="Pg160">160</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Confession of sins obligatory, <ref target="Pg345">345</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>various views, <ref target="Pg366">366</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sacramental, of divine institution, <ref target="Pg346">346</ref>, et seq.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Confirmation&mdash;graces of, <ref target="Pg021">21</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>defined, <ref target="Pg280">280</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>signs that follow, <ref target="Pg282">282</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>described by St. Augustine, <ref target="Pg282">282</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>abolished by the Protestants, <ref target="Pg285">285</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Constantine gives peace to the Church, <ref target="Pg137">137</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Continence&mdash;voluntary, superior to matrimony, <ref target="Pg399">399</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cross&mdash;held in reverence, <ref target="Pg003">3</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>instrument of the crucifixion, <ref target="Pg003">3</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>adorns our sanctuaries, <ref target="Pg003">3</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>surmounts our Churches, <ref target="Pg003">3</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>emblem of salvation, <ref target="Pg003">3</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cross&mdash;sign of the, ancient and pious practice, <ref target="Pg003">3</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>how made, <ref target="Pg003">3</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>taught by tradition, <ref target="Pg003">3</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>profession of faith, <ref target="Pg003">3</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>salutary act of religion, <ref target="Pg003">3</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>D'Aubigne on Protestant Reformation, <ref target="Pg264">264</ref>&mdash;comments on divorce of Henry VIII.</l>
</lg>

<pb n="422"/><anchor id="Pg422"/>

<lg>
<l>David and Nathan, <ref target="Pg376">376</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Deacons, priests and bishops in Protestant sects, <ref target="Pg010">10</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Death does not dissever love among friends, <ref target="Pg161">161</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Decrees in doctrinal matters irrevocable, <ref target="Pg077">77</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>De Maistre quoted on name Protestant, <ref target="Pg055">55</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Deuteronomy quoted on Biblical interpretation, <ref target="Pg078">78</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Devotion&mdash;true, is interior, <ref target="Pg320">320</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>manuals of, criticised, <ref target="Pg366">366</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Divine perfections sources of valuable lessons, <ref target="Pg016">16</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Divine power manifested on Easter Sunday, <ref target="Pg003">3</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Divinity of Christ not proved solely by Scripture, <ref target="Pg079">79</ref>, et seq.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Divorce never allowed&mdash;separation sometimes, <ref target="Pg412">412</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Divorce prohibited by St. Paul, <ref target="Pg413">413</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Divorced man may not marry during wife's lifetime, <ref target="Pg414">414</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Divorce&mdash;legal, causes, <ref target="Pg416">416</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>cruel consequences of, <ref target="Pg417">417</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Doctrinal decrees of the Church are irrevocable, <ref target="Pg076">76</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Doctrines of the Church cannot be reformed, <ref target="Pg073">73</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the same everywhere, <ref target="Pg010">10</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>new definitions do not impair unity of faith, <ref target="Pg011">11</ref>, et seq.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dogma of the Immaculate Conception formulated, <ref target="Pg171">171</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Döllinger, Dr., anathematized, <ref target="Pg010">10</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Duties to God&mdash;first lessons taught us, <ref target="Pg018">18</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Eastern churches allow a married clergy, <ref target="Pg402">402</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ecumenical councils vindicate papal supremacy, <ref target="Pg113">113</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>defined, <ref target="Pg114">114</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Elias dear to Jehovah, <ref target="Pg037">37</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Elizabeth, Queen, and Henry VIII. persecuted Catholics, <ref target="Pg250">250</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Elizabethan and Marian persecutions compared, <ref target="Pg262">262</ref>, et seq.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Episcopal clergyman favors Catholic books, <ref target="Pg020">20</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Evangelical Alliance failed&mdash;had no common platform, <ref target="Pg119">119</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Exodus, Book of, and sacred images, <ref target="Pg200">200</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Extreme Unction defined, <ref target="Pg384">384</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>effects, <ref target="Pg021">21</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>supported by ancient authority, <ref target="Pg386">386</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Faith, hope and charity necessary for Catholics, <ref target="Pg037">37</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Faith, temple of, the Church, <ref target="Pg010">10</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Albertus Magnus quoted, <ref target="Pg015">15</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Faith, unity of, required, <ref target="Pg005">5</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>progress in, does not change truth, <ref target="Pg015">15</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fathers of the Church on Confirmation, <ref target="Pg283">283</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>echo the words of St. Paul on the Eucharist, <ref target="Pg297">297</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>they are unanimous on praying for the dead, <ref target="Pg217">217</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fenelon favors liberty of conscience, <ref target="Pg228">228</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Founders of various religious denominations, <ref target="Pg046">46</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Foxe's Book of Martyrs and the Lives of the Saints contrasted, <ref target="Pg020">20</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Free-will&mdash;Catholics enjoy, <ref target="Pg023">23</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Garbled versions of the Bible restricted, <ref target="Pg092">92</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gibbon quoted on triumphs of the Church, <ref target="Pg053">53</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>God&mdash;infinite in knowledge, power and goodness, <ref target="Pg001">1</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>governs by His Providence, <ref target="Pg001">1</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>created all things by His Omnipotence, <ref target="Pg001">1</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>three persons in One, <ref target="Pg001">1</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>persons equal, <ref target="Pg001">1</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>God commands the making of images, <ref target="Pg301">301</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>God requires that His ministers be respected, <ref target="Pg388">388</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>God works through his representatives, <ref target="Pg341">341</ref>, et seq.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>God's judgment impressed on the child mind, <ref target="Pg019">19</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gospel ministers are ordained and commissioned, <ref target="Pg039">39</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Government&mdash;state and church compared, <ref target="Pg007">7</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Governmental aid not desired for Church, <ref target="Pg246">246</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Grace defined, <ref target="Pg265">265</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>necessary for sanctification, <ref target="Pg265">265</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<pb n="423"/><anchor id="Pg423"/>

<lg>
<l>Graces imparted by Holy Orders and Matrimony, <ref target="Pg021">21</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Graces needed by married couple, special, <ref target="Pg408">408</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Great Spirit worshiped by American Indians, <ref target="Pg309">309</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gregory II, Pope, writes about images, <ref target="Pg140">140</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Habeas Corpus, <ref target="Pg223">223</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hail Mary explained, <ref target="Pg174">174</ref>, et seq.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hamlet, Shakespeare's, advised by the dead, <ref target="Pg221">221</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hebrews believed in intercessory prayer, <ref target="Pg159">159</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Henry VIII. excommunicated, <ref target="Pg010">10</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>divorce refused, <ref target="Pg044">44</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Henry VIII and Elizabeth persecuted Catholics, <ref target="Pg250">250</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Heresy and schism opposed to unity, <ref target="Pg005">5</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>likened to murder and idolatry, <ref target="Pg005">5</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>heresy defined, <ref target="Pg005">5</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>and the Church, <ref target="Pg054">54</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a crime against church and state, <ref target="Pg255">255</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Holy Eucharist&mdash;St. Paul's testimony on, <ref target="Pg295">295</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Holiness a mark of the Church, <ref target="Pg016">16</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Holmes, Oliver Wendell, praises Mary, <ref target="Pg179">179</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Holy Ghost sent by Christ, <ref target="Pg003">3</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on Pentecost, <ref target="Pg003">3</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>guides the Church's teaching, <ref target="Pg065">65</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Holy Scripture&mdash;depository of God's Word, <ref target="Pg077">77</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Holy Orders and Matrimony&mdash;graces of, <ref target="Pg021">21</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Image&mdash;Making commanded by God, <ref target="Pg201">201</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Images, Sacred&mdash;advantages of, <ref target="Pg204">204</ref>, et seq.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>and the Reformers, <ref target="Pg198">198</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>and the Council of Trent, <ref target="Pg198">198</ref>, et seq.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>and the Book of Exodus, <ref target="Pg200">200</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>veneration of, <ref target="Pg196">196</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Catacombs abound in, <ref target="Pg196">196</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Immaculate Conception implied in Scripture, <ref target="Pg171">171</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in our earliest history, <ref target="Pg173">173</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>dogma formulated in 1854, <ref target="Pg171">171</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Indestructibility of the Church due to finger of God, <ref target="Pg057">57</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Infallible Bible not sufficient <ref target="Pg133">133</ref>, et seq.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Infallibility a special guidance of the Holy Ghost, <ref target="Pg065">65</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>implied in the attributes of the Church, <ref target="Pg065">65</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of Apostolic teaching, <ref target="Pg065">65</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>proved from Scripture, <ref target="Pg066">66</ref>, et seq.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>transmitted by Apostles to successors, <ref target="Pg065">65</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>blessings attendant on&mdash;for the faithful, <ref target="Pg072">72</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Catholic idea of, reasonable and satisfactory, <ref target="Pg135">135</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>misapprehended, <ref target="Pg121">121</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>what it does not mean, <ref target="Pg121">121</ref>, et seq.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>what it is, <ref target="Pg123">123</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>founded on Bible, <ref target="Pg125">125</ref>, et seq.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not a new doctrine, <ref target="Pg130">130</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Incense, its use, <ref target="Pg334">334</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Indians, American&mdash;worshiped the Great Spirit, <ref target="Pg309">309</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Indulgence defined, <ref target="Pg375">375</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>granted by the Church, <ref target="Pg376">376</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>elements required, <ref target="Pg377">377</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>classes, <ref target="Pg378">378</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>does not exempt from doing penance, <ref target="Pg379">379</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>abused, <ref target="Pg380">380</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Infant Baptism proved from early Doctors, <ref target="Pg270">270</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>and the Council of Carthage, <ref target="Pg270">270</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not to be delayed, <ref target="Pg273">273</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Inquisition, Spanish&mdash;cruelties, <ref target="Pg248">248</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its true character, <ref target="Pg254">254</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>explained, <ref target="Pg254">254</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>excesses disavowed by the Church, <ref target="Pg258">258</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Inventions and scientific appliances beneficial to Church, <ref target="Pg059">59</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Invocation of the Saints defined, <ref target="Pg152">152</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ireland and the Ancient Church, <ref target="Pg054">54</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Irish clergy persecuted by Cromwell, <ref target="Pg250">250</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jeremiah, after death, prays for Jewish people, <ref target="Pg159">159</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jesus Christ, second person of Blessed Trinity, <ref target="Pg001">1</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>perfect God and perfect man, <ref target="Pg001">1</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>assumes human nature, <ref target="Pg001">1</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>born on Christmas Day, <ref target="Pg001">1</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>led a life of obscurity at Nazareth, <ref target="Pg001">1</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>commences public career, <ref target="Pg001">1</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>associates with his Apostles, <ref target="Pg002">2</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>doing good, <ref target="Pg002">2</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>preaches new gospel, <ref target="Pg002">2</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>crucified on Mount Calvary, <ref target="Pg002">2</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>purchases our redemption, <ref target="Pg002">2</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>is our Saviour and Redeemer, <ref target="Pg002">2</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>example to be imitated, <ref target="Pg002">2</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>manifested Divine power on Easter Sunday, <ref target="Pg003">3</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>raised Himself to life, <ref target="Pg003">3</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>ascended into heaven, <ref target="Pg003">3</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>spends forty days on earth, <ref target="Pg003">3</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sends Holy Ghost, <ref target="Pg003">3</ref>;</l>
<pb n="424"/><anchor id="Pg424"/>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>requires unity of faith, <ref target="Pg005">5</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>prays for unity, <ref target="Pg005">5</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>mission evidenced in unity of Church, <ref target="Pg005">5</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>speaks of His Church, not churches, <ref target="Pg006">6</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>our model, <ref target="Pg017">17</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>wrote no line of Scripture, <ref target="Pg080">80</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>established supreme head of the Church, <ref target="Pg098">98</ref>, et seq.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>founded but one Church, <ref target="Pg100">100</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the one Mediator, <ref target="Pg161">161</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>came on earth to wash away sins, <ref target="Pg268">268</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>our Victim in the Mass, <ref target="Pg317">317</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a Physician and Savior, <ref target="Pg340">340</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jesus' prayer is always heard, <ref target="Pg126">126</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>name implies His mission, <ref target="Pg339">339</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>example a means of sanctification, <ref target="Pg016">16</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>moral lessons tend to sanctification, <ref target="Pg016">16</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jews ordered by Christ to obey constituted teachers, <ref target="Pg079">79</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>pray for their dead, <ref target="Pg220">220</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>venerate the Bible, <ref target="Pg077">77</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>were released from religious persecution by St. Bernard, <ref target="Pg228">228</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>appealed to the Sanhedrim for the settlement of disputes, <ref target="Pg077">77</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their priests expounded Bible, <ref target="Pg078">78</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their High Priest and the Roman Pontiff compared, <ref target="Pg095">95</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Job intercedes for his friends, <ref target="Pg157">157</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>John, Abbot of Constantinople, appeals to Pope Gregory I, <ref target="Pg112">112</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Judea a hallowed soil, <ref target="Pg164">164</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jurisdiction of God's ministers unlimited, <ref target="Pg388">388</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Laity contain many Saints, <ref target="Pg023">23</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Langton, Archbishop, and Catholic barons, <ref target="Pg233">233</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Leibnitz taught that Christ is entire under each species, <ref target="Pg302">302</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Leo the Great, Pope, and Attila, <ref target="Pg139">139</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Leo the Isaurian desires spiritual jurisdiction, <ref target="Pg139">139</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>destroys paintings, <ref target="Pg140">140</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>wars on images, <ref target="Pg197">197</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lepanto&mdash;victory of 1571, <ref target="Pg053">53</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Liberty, religious, explained, <ref target="Pg226">226</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>ever promoted by the Catholic Church, <ref target="Pg226">226</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>taught by Becanus, <ref target="Pg230">230</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>favored by Fenelon, <ref target="Pg228">228</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>and civil rights defended by the Church, <ref target="Pg231">231</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>human not feared, <ref target="Pg061">61</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lights on the altar&mdash;meaning, <ref target="Pg333">333</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Literature, Catholic, favored by Episcopal clergyman, <ref target="Pg020">20</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Llorente, historian of Spanish Inquisition, <ref target="Pg253">253</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>who he was, <ref target="Pg253">253</ref>, et seq.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Longfellow refers to Mary's influence and intercession, <ref target="Pg189">189</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Loyalty to Christ implies veneration of His representative, <ref target="Pg106">106</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Luther advocated Communion under one form, <ref target="Pg301">301</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>accused John Tetzel, <ref target="Pg382">382</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lutheranism founded by Luther, <ref target="Pg044">44</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>rise and progress of, <ref target="Pg054">54</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Magna Charta&mdash;great bulwark of liberty, <ref target="Pg233">233</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Magna Charta, the Church's&mdash;the revealed Word of God, <ref target="Pg124">124</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Marriage law violated by Henry VIII, <ref target="Pg010">10</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>indissoluble, <ref target="Pg410">410</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>contract&mdash;most inviolable and irrevocable, <ref target="Pg410">410</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>forbidden to priests after ordination, <ref target="Pg400">400</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Married couple need special graces, <ref target="Pg408">408</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mary singularly honored by Jesus Christ, <ref target="Pg165">165</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Mother of God&mdash;meaning, <ref target="Pg166">166</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not mother of divinity&mdash;Mother of God, <ref target="Pg167">167</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>truly and really Mother of God, <ref target="Pg167">167</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of surpassing dignity and excellence, <ref target="Pg168">168</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>always a virgin, <ref target="Pg168">168</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>loves men, <ref target="Pg190">190</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>exempted from original sin, <ref target="Pg267">267</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mary's soul never subject to sin, <ref target="Pg171">171</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>her soul needed a redeemer, <ref target="Pg171">171</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>prerogatives, <ref target="Pg174">174</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>honor redounds to God, <ref target="Pg181">181</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>honor founded on Scriptural sanction, <ref target="Pg186">186</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>honor encouraged by the Church, <ref target="Pg187">187</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>intercession superior to that of the Angels and the Saints, <ref target="Pg188">188</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>influence and intercession referred to by Longfellow, <ref target="Pg189">189-193</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>invoked by Edgar Allan Poe, <ref target="Pg191">191</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mary Magdalen experienced the mercy of Jesus, <ref target="Pg340">340</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Maryland&mdash;cradle of civil and religious liberty, <ref target="Pg233">233</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>land of the Sanctuary, <ref target="Pg233">233</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>religious toleration explained, <ref target="Pg234">234</ref>, et seq.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>changes effected by Puritans, <ref target="Pg237">237</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>tolerations&mdash;three, <ref target="Pg238">238</ref>, et seq.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mass is identical with the Sacrifice of the Cross, <ref target="Pg311">311</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>instituted, <ref target="Pg312">312</ref>;</l>
<pb n="425"/><anchor id="Pg425"/>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a perpetual oblation, <ref target="Pg313">313</ref>, et seq.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of Apostolic origin, <ref target="Pg314">314</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its ceremonial, <ref target="Pg328">328</ref>, et seq.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>why said in Latin, <ref target="Pg329">329</ref>, et seq.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Matrimony defined, <ref target="Pg408">408</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>instituted by Christ, <ref target="Pg409">409</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>imparts ample and suitable graces, <ref target="Pg021">21</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Missionaries, Catholic, wherever English is spoken, <ref target="Pg035">35</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Apostolic&mdash;sent by Popes, <ref target="Pg115">115</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mohammedanism, rise and conquests, <ref target="Pg053">53</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>and the Church, <ref target="Pg053">53</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Monica, St., requests prayers for the repose of her soul, <ref target="Pg216">216</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Morality of Catholic and Protestant countries contrasted, <ref target="Pg369">369</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>lax among Catholics&mdash;accusation answered, <ref target="Pg364">364</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Christ's lessons tend to sanctification, <ref target="Pg016">16</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>inculcated by the Church, <ref target="Pg018">18</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>moral law standard of perfection, <ref target="Pg018">18</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>More, Sir Thomas, quoted on Bible in English, <ref target="Pg092">92</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mormons claim Biblical authorization for polygamy, <ref target="Pg088">88</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mormonism at variance with Gospel, <ref target="Pg410">410</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mysteries, principal, incentive to holiness, <ref target="Pg017">17</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>proposed by the Church, <ref target="Pg017">17</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>surround us everywhere, <ref target="Pg293">293</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Naaman the Syrian cured, <ref target="Pg361">361</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Napoleon's demands on Pope Pius VII, <ref target="Pg242">242</ref>, et seq.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nathan and David, <ref target="Pg376">376</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nuptial bond ratified by God, <ref target="Pg411">411</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Onias, after death, prays for the people of God, <ref target="Pg159">159</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Oracles, rashness of following discordant, <ref target="Pg072">72</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Origen bears witness to the spread of Christianity, <ref target="Pg031">31</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Original sin, all men born in, <ref target="Pg267">267</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Blessed Virgin alone exempted, <ref target="Pg267">267</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>universal, <ref target="Pg272">272</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pagans retained primitive traditions about sacrifices, <ref target="Pg309">309</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Papal Jurisdiction&mdash;examples, <ref target="Pg109">109</ref>, et seq.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Papal states a convenience for the Holy Father, <ref target="Pg145">145</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Paul, St. on heresy and schism, <ref target="Pg005">5</ref>, et seq.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>asks intercession, <ref target="Pg158">158</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Penance&mdash;effects of Sacrament, <ref target="Pg021">21</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pentecost&mdash;Christ sends Holy Ghost, <ref target="Pg003">3</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Perpetuity of the Church, <ref target="Pg050">50</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>defined, <ref target="Pg050">50</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>foretold in the Scriptures, <ref target="Pg050">50</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Persecutions lasted 280 years, <ref target="Pg052">52</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Persecution and bloodshed not sanctioned by the Church, <ref target="Pg249">249</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Persecutions by Queen Mary of England, <ref target="Pg261">261</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>compared with those under Elizabeth, <ref target="Pg262">262</ref>, et seq.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pepin, King of the Franks, defeats Lombards, <ref target="Pg141">141</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Peter, St., primacy of, <ref target="Pg095">95</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>foundation of the Church, <ref target="Pg100">100</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>first Bishop of Rome, <ref target="Pg106">106</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>supremacy handed down, <ref target="Pg108">108</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>and Washington compared, <ref target="Pg108">108</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>oracle of the Apostles, <ref target="Pg126">126</ref>, et seq.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Photius appeals to Pope Nicholas I to confirm his election to the Patriarchate of Constantinople, <ref target="Pg112">112</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Plebescitum, Roman, explained, <ref target="Pg146">146</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Plutarch declares: <q>No nations without priests and altars,</q> <ref target="Pg309">309</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Poe, Edgar Allan, invokes Mary, <ref target="Pg191">191</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pontiff, Supreme, is commander-in-chief of the Church, <ref target="Pg117">117</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pope is Vicar of Christ, <ref target="Pg129">129</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>father and doctor of Christians, chief pastor of the Church, <ref target="Pg130">130</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>confirms or rejects decrees of councils, <ref target="Pg131">131</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a prisoner in his own house, <ref target="Pg145">145</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Popes succeed to Peter's supremacy, <ref target="Pg108">108</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>send Apostolic missionaries, <ref target="Pg115">115</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>go to confession regularly, <ref target="Pg122">122</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>oracles of the early Church, <ref target="Pg128">128</ref>, et seq.,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>recognized in all ages as infallible teachers, <ref target="Pg132">132</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Prayer for unity, <ref target="Pg005">5</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>and Sacraments&mdash;means of sanctification, <ref target="Pg020">20</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a duty binding in conscience <ref target="Pg020">20</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of Jesus Christ, always heard <ref target="Pg126">126</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>for the dead, consoling, <ref target="Pg225">225</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<pb n="426"/><anchor id="Pg426"/>

<lg>
<l>Priest, Catholic obliged to read word of God, <ref target="Pg094">94</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>ambassador of God, <ref target="Pg387">387</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>dispenser of God's graces, <ref target="Pg390">390</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>titles, <ref target="Pg391">391</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>physician of souls, <ref target="Pg396">396</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>must be man of prayer, <ref target="Pg398">398</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Priestly obligations, <ref target="Pg395">395</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>stands before God, intercessor for his people, <ref target="Pg396">396</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>experience in sacred ministry, <ref target="Pg367">367</ref>, et seq.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Primacy of St. Peter, <ref target="Pg095">95</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>promised, <ref target="Pg098">98</ref>, et seq.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>and supremacy similarly demonstrated, <ref target="Pg109">109</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Progress, Modern, and the Church, <ref target="Pg059">59</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>intellectual fostered by the Church, <ref target="Pg060">60</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>cannot destroy the Church, <ref target="Pg059">59</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Prophecies of Christ fulfilled by spread of Christianity, <ref target="Pg030">30</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Protestant sects make no claim to Catholicity, <ref target="Pg032">32</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Episcopalians sometimes usurp the title of Catholic, <ref target="Pg033">33</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>inconsistency between teaching and practice, <ref target="Pg082">82</ref>, et seq.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Protestantism not traceable to Apostolic times, <ref target="Pg047">47</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>and Arianism paralleled, <ref target="Pg055">55</ref>, et seq.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Protestants differ in belief among themselves, <ref target="Pg009">9</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sects do not possess unity, <ref target="Pg009">9</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>combat the perpetual virginity of Mary, <ref target="Pg169">169</ref>, et seq.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their objections answered, <ref target="Pg169">169</ref>, et seq.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>burned Catholic churches, <ref target="Pg251">251</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>abolished confirmation, <ref target="Pg285">285</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Puritans effected changes in Maryland, <ref target="Pg237">237</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>persecuted others for conscience's sake, <ref target="Pg251">251</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ranke quoted on Spanish Inquisition, <ref target="Pg256">256</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Raphael Archangel and young Tobias, <ref target="Pg155">155</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Real presence founded on scripture, <ref target="Pg288">288</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>proved from the New Testament, <ref target="Pg288">288</ref>, et seq.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Reformation of morals effected, <ref target="Pg026">26</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Reformers made a babel of the Bible, <ref target="Pg086">86</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>and sacred images, <ref target="Pg198">198</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>guilty of violence towards others, <ref target="Pg250">250</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Regeneration, necessary to all, <ref target="Pg272">272</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Religious denominations and their founders, <ref target="Pg046">46</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Repentance&mdash;Catholic and Protestant systems contrasted, <ref target="Pg362">362</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Revelation&mdash;church divinely appointed teacher of, <ref target="Pg076">76</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Reverence for the Cross, <ref target="Pg003">3</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>and adoration compared, <ref target="Pg202">202</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rites and ceremonies prescribed by God, <ref target="Pg322">322</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ritual described in Revelation, <ref target="Pg324">324</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rodriguez, <q>Christian Perfection</q> recommended, <ref target="Pg020">20</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Roman Pontiff and Jewish High Priest, compared, <ref target="Pg095">95</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Roman Plebescitum explained, <ref target="Pg146">146</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rome, St. Peter, first Bishop of, <ref target="Pg106">106</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rome, St. Peter's residence in, proved, <ref target="Pg107">107</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>testified by eminent writers, <ref target="Pg107">107</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sacramental confession of divine institution, <ref target="Pg346">346</ref>, et seq.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sacraments and prayers are means of grace, <ref target="Pg265">265</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>defined, <ref target="Pg265">265</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>constituent elements, <ref target="Pg265">265</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>seven, instituted by Christ, <ref target="Pg266">266</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sacred images&mdash;advantages, <ref target="Pg204">204</ref>, et seq.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>and the Reformers, <ref target="Pg198">198</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>and the council of Trent, <ref target="Pg198">198</ref>, et seq.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sacrifices, defined, <ref target="Pg307">307</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>offered by all peoples, <ref target="Pg307">307</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>early, <ref target="Pg307">307</ref>, et seq.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>various, in Old Law, <ref target="Pg317">317</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>St. Alphonsus, a distinguished reformer, <ref target="Pg027">27</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>St. Ambrose describes Mary's life, <ref target="Pg194">194</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>confronts the Emperor Theodosius, the Great, <ref target="Pg232">232</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on the sevenfold gifts of the Holy Ghost, <ref target="Pg284">284</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>St. Athanasius appeals to Pope Julius I against a Decree of the Eastern Bishops, <ref target="Pg111">111</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>St. Augustine quoted about truth, <ref target="Pg012">12</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on false claims to Catholicity, <ref target="Pg033">33</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on Apostolicity, <ref target="Pg049">49</ref>, <ref target="Pg056">56</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>describes confirmation, <ref target="Pg282">282</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on Chrism ointment, <ref target="Pg285">285</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on secret confession, <ref target="Pg360">360</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>St. Basil of Cæserea has recourse to Pope Damasus, <ref target="Pg111">111</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<pb n="427"/><anchor id="Pg427"/>

<lg>
<l>St. Bartholomew's Day&mdash;massacre, <ref target="Pg259">259</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>church not interested in, <ref target="Pg259">259</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>facts stated, <ref target="Pg259">259</ref>, et seq.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>St. Bernard released Jews from religious persecution, <ref target="Pg228">228</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>St. Charles Borromeo, the reformer, <ref target="Pg027">27</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>St. Cyril appeals to Pope Celestine, <ref target="Pg111">111</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>St. Francis de Sales' writings recommended, <ref target="Pg020">20</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>St. Hilary of Arles and papal supremacy, <ref target="Pg111">111</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>St. Ignatius Loyola, conspicuous reformer, <ref target="Pg027">27</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>St. Irenæus bears witness to the spread of Christianity, <ref target="Pg031">31</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>St. Jerome's edition of the Scriptures, <ref target="Pg091">91</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>edits the vulgate, <ref target="Pg091">91</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>St. John Chrysostom appeals to Pope Innocent I, <ref target="Pg111">111</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>St. Justin, martyr, witness of Catholicity in second century, <ref target="Pg031">31</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>St. Paul invokes intercession of the Ephesians, <ref target="Pg158">158</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>testimony on the Holy Eucharist, <ref target="Pg295">295</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>granted indulgences, <ref target="Pg376">376</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>prohibited divorce, <ref target="Pg413">413</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>St. Peter's primacy, <ref target="Pg095">95</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>first bishop of Rome, <ref target="Pg106">106</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>residence in Rome proved, <ref target="Pg107">107</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>supremacy handed down, <ref target="Pg108">108</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Oracle of the Apostles, <ref target="Pg126">126</ref>, et seq.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>St. Philip Neri, apostle of modern Rome, <ref target="Pg027">27</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>St. Vincent of Lerins on doctrine and practice, <ref target="Pg015">15</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Saints&mdash;many among laity, <ref target="Pg023">23</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sanctity&mdash;examples witnessed, <ref target="Pg023">23</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sanhedrim settled disputes for the Jews, <ref target="Pg077">77</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>explained Bible, <ref target="Pg077">77</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Scandals do not invalidate Church's claims to sanctify, <ref target="Pg026">26</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Schism and heresy oppose unity, <ref target="Pg005">5</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>schism defined, <ref target="Pg005">5</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Schismatic Churches have no claims to Catholicity, <ref target="Pg032">32</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Scripture, Holy, depository of, God's Word, <ref target="Pg077">77</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>no line of, written by Christ, <ref target="Pg080">80</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>does not contain all truth, <ref target="Pg089">89</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>alone, not sufficient guide and rule of faith, <ref target="Pg089">89</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>perpetuated by the Church, <ref target="Pg091">91</ref>, et seq.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>St. Jerome translates, <ref target="Pg091">91</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sects&mdash;conflicting in North Carolina, <ref target="Pg009">9</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Protestant do not possess unity, <ref target="Pg009">9</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sign of the Cross&mdash;ancient and pious practice, <ref target="Pg003">3</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>how made, <ref target="Pg003">3</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Tertullian quoted on, <ref target="Pg003">3</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>taught by tradition, <ref target="Pg003">3</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>profession of faith, <ref target="Pg003">3</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>salutary act of religion, <ref target="Pg003">3</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Signs following confirmation, <ref target="Pg017">17</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sin includes guilt and punishment, <ref target="Pg375">375</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>original&mdash;all men born in, <ref target="Pg267">267</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Most Blessed Virgin alone excepted, <ref target="Pg267">267</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Smithfield and Tyburn compared, <ref target="Pg264">264</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Socrates quoted on papal supremacy, <ref target="Pg111">111</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Solomon and Judas as warnings, <ref target="Pg019">19</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Spain&mdash;condition of, during the Inquisition, <ref target="Pg255">255</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Spanish Inquisition&mdash;cruelties, <ref target="Pg248">248</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Llorente, historian, <ref target="Pg253">253</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>excesses disavowed by the Church, <ref target="Pg258">258</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>"Spiritual Combat" recommended, <ref target="Pg020">20</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Supremacy of St. Peter&mdash;Popes succeed to, <ref target="Pg108">108</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Socrates quoted on, <ref target="Pg111">111</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>and Primacy similarly demonstrated, <ref target="Pg109">109</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Supreme Court procedure and Church practice compared, <ref target="Pg130">130</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Supreme Head of the Church maintains unity, <ref target="Pg098">98</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>established by Christ, <ref target="Pg098">98</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>is commander-in-chief of the Church, <ref target="Pg117">117</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Teachers&mdash;constituted, to be obeyed, <ref target="Pg079">79</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Teaching of Christ versus Book of Homilies, <ref target="Pg067">67</ref>, et seq.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Teaching of Apostles infallible, <ref target="Pg065">65</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Teaching of the Church guided by the Holy Ghost, <ref target="Pg065">65</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Temporal power&mdash;end and aim, <ref target="Pg144">144</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not necessary to Church's preservation, <ref target="Pg058">58</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tennyson's Sir Belvidere asks prayers for his soul, <ref target="Pg225">225</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Testament, Old&mdash;teaches existence of Purgatory, <ref target="Pg211">211</ref>, et seq.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Testimony of St. Paul on the Holy Eucharist, <ref target="Pg295">295</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<pb n="428"/><anchor id="Pg428"/>

<lg>
<l>Tertullian bears witness to the spread of Christianity, <ref target="Pg031">31</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>treats of the Apostolicity of the Church, <ref target="Pg049">49</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tetzel, John, accused by Luther, <ref target="Pg382">382</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Theodoret appeals to St. Leo, Pope, <ref target="Pg112">112</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Theodosius the Great confronted by St. Ambrose, <ref target="Pg232">232</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Thomas Arundel praised Queen Anne, <ref target="Pg092">92</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Titles of the Catholic priest, <ref target="Pg391">391</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tobias, Young, and the Archangel Raphael, <ref target="Pg155">155</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Toleration, Religious, in Maryland, <ref target="Pg234">234</ref>, et seq.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Transubstantiation a mystery, <ref target="Pg292">292</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Triumphs of the Church according to Gibbon, <ref target="Pg053">53</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Trent, Council of&mdash;great reformatory tribunal, <ref target="Pg027">27</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on sacred images, <ref target="Pg198">198</ref>, et seq.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>asserts doctrine of Purgatory, <ref target="Pg210">210</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Truth unchangeable, <ref target="Pg012">12</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tyburn and Smithfield compared, <ref target="Pg264">264</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tyndall on debt of science to the Church, <ref target="Pg060">60</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Unity of the Church, <ref target="Pg005">5</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>heresy and schism opposed to, <ref target="Pg005">5</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>required by Jesus Christ, <ref target="Pg005">5</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of faith required, <ref target="Pg005">5</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Jesus Christ prays for it, <ref target="Pg005">5</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>prayer of Christ for, <ref target="Pg005">5</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>an evidence of Christ's mission, <ref target="Pg005">5</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in government it is essential, <ref target="Pg006">6</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not found in Protestant sects, <ref target="Pg009">9</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>found in Catholic Church alone, <ref target="Pg010">10</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Catholic, in what it consists, <ref target="Pg010">10</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of government and faith, <ref target="Pg011">11</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>safeguard of government, <ref target="Pg011">11</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of faith not impaired by new doctrinal definitions, <ref target="Pg011">11</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of the Church maintained by supreme head, <ref target="Pg098">98</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Christian, endorsed, <ref target="Pg119">119</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>implies recognition of pope's headship, <ref target="Pg119">119</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Unbaptized Infants&mdash;Church's teaching regarding, <ref target="Pg273">273</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Validity of the Pope's title to the papal states, <ref target="Pg141">141</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Variation in Biblical interpretation, <ref target="Pg087">87</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Vatican Council assembled from all nations, <ref target="Pg332">332</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Ecumenical, <ref target="Pg034">34</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>all countries represented, <ref target="Pg034">34</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>all systems represented, <ref target="Pg034">34</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Veneration of images, <ref target="Pg196">196</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Vestments&mdash;their meaning, <ref target="Pg335">335</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their colors symbolical, <ref target="Pg337">337</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Vicar of Christ is the Pope, <ref target="Pg129">129</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Victim in the Mass is Jesus Christ, <ref target="Pg317">317</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Victor Emmanuel, the modern Achab, <ref target="Pg144">144</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Virgins, Consecrated&mdash;Apostolate of Sisterhoods, <ref target="Pg023">23</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Virgins especially honored by Christ, <ref target="Pg400">400</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Virginity, Perpetual&mdash;of Mary, combated by Protestants, <ref target="Pg169">169</ref>, et seq.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Voltaire bears testimony to the good use of Church temporalities, <ref target="Pg138">138</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Vulgate&mdash;edited by St. Jerome, <ref target="Pg091">91</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Warfare on Church&mdash;foreign and domestic, <ref target="Pg051">51</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Washington and St. Peter compared, <ref target="Pg108">108</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Washington's Address to the Catholics, <ref target="Pg241">241</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wesley, John, founds Methodist Church, <ref target="Pg044">44</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Westminster Abbey has many statues of heroes, <ref target="Pg201">201</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wordsworth on <q>Mother's Love and Maiden Purity,</q> <ref target="Pg168">168</ref>, <ref target="Pg180">180</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>tribute to Mary, <ref target="Pg175">175</ref>.</l>
</lg>

</div>
</body>
<back rend="page-break-before: right">
  <div id="footnotes">
    <index index="toc" />
    <index index="pdf" />
    <head>Footnotes</head>
    <divGen type="footnotes"/>
  </div>
  <div rend="page-break-before: right">
    <divGen type="pgfooter" />
  </div>
</back>
</text>
</TEI.2>
